Haiver | 00:00
Hi art friends. We welcome back today our visiting artist in residence this quarter, Sasha Stiles. Sasha is a first-generation Kalmyk American poet, a language artist, an AI researcher, She's working at the nexus of text and technology, and she's known for pioneering experiments with generative literature and computational poetics. Her practice really refracts both a sense of heritage and tradition and the disruptive exploration of kind of technology and consciousness, probing human voice in this kind of increasingly post-human age we're all experiencing right now. Stiles' work has been honored by the Pre-Arts Electronica, SIGART Prize, the Lumen Prize, the Optimism AI Prize, and the Future Art Awards. She's been featured by MoMA, Art Forum, Christie's, NPR, The Washington Post, as well as Poet and Writers. And Stiles has been presented at numerous venues around the world, including Lincoln Center here in New York, London's V&A Museum, the Art Basel, Art Dubai, Scope, Kunsthalle Zurich, the Greb's Museum of Contemporary Art, and Outernet London and the Crassel Arts Center. 
So we are so lucky to have her with us this Porter digging into her practice this week. She joins us for her process lecture, which we get to dig beneath the surface and take a look at how she's doing what she's doing and why and not just the what. 
So please welcome artist Sasha Stiles.
Sasha Stiles | 01:41
Hello. Hello, I'm so happy to be back. Thanks for the warm welcome again. 
Yeah, I think last time we were together, I was really happy to be able to share a little bit about my practice and kind of take a little bit more of a broad view on my work with language and technology. So I'm excited this week to be back to do a little bit of a deeper dive. And I was thinking, you Given this interface that we're all connecting through, this will be something of a hybrid between a craft talk and something of a generative poetry workshop as well. A little bit of a mix of these two things because I want to share some ideas and share a little bit more of a peek under the hood, as it were. But I want to use this as a chance to... Invite you all to do a little bit of thinking in real time and hopefully come away with a methodology or some tools to bring back into your own practice. 
So I think that's going to be the approach for today's session. And with that, I think I would love to jump into my slides and I'll share a little presentation as I'm walking through. 
So theme of today's session is crafting systems. So, you know, I talked a lot last time we met about poetry as a technology and language as a system. And I wanted to unpack that a little bit more this week in practical terms. 
So, you know, I want to begin, I think, with maybe zooming in a bit on this idea of systems. First of all, because I think systems is, you know, a word that we hear a lot when we're talking about contemporary art and generativity and technology. And I don't want to, you know, rush past it. I really want to sort of unpack why so much of my work revolves around systems, you know, what it is that draws me to working with systems, what systems are, you know, why I think it's, you know, interesting or intriguing or maybe even you know, important or essential in some ways to be investigating systems. 
So today that's the tact I'd love to take is to think about artistic practice through this particular lens, through the lens of systems. So, to begin, you know, when we hear the word system, I think it has technological overtones for a lot of us. We tend to think about algorithms and software and machines. Long before computers existed, humans were building systems for making meanings. As we discussed last time we met, language is a system, poetry is a system, writing is a system, memory is a system, archives are forms of systems. 
You know, libraries are systems, a form of system that I dearly love. And each of these instantiations of systems emerged from a common need, and that is the need to preserve and transform and transmit meaning across time. 
So I kind of want to start there just really thinking about systems in a slightly broader, maybe more poetic, maybe more metaphorical, but no less, you know, accurate terminology. So I want to think about systems and how that connects with this idea of making meaning, which is of course at the core of artistic practice. Let's maybe take a leap back in time as well and just do a little bit of scene setting and contextualization here. 
So for centuries, we have really thought about artworks in a broad sense, this is a little bit of a generalization, but we've often thought about artworks as objects that are containers for meaning. So, when we think about traditional forms of art, paintings and sculptures, poems, images, things like that, we are thinking about something that is made by an artist and then encountered by an audience. And in that sense, we sort of think about approaching an object that is imbued with a meaning that the artist has given it. And of course, you know, that idea has been complicated in many ways over time. In the 20th century, you know, we had artists like Marcel Duchamp, we had Fluxus artists, we had, you know, folks like Sol LeWitt and other conceptual practitioners who really kind of challenged that premise of art as an object that contains meaning and, you know, proposed maybe alternatively that meaning could reside in intangible things like ideas and instructions and scores and more conceptual frameworks. 
So you know, in a sense, we kind of began moving away from the idea or expanding beyond because of course we're not moving away from it, but expanding beyond the idea that the artwork is just an object and beginning to consider that an object or that an artwork can be a process, that an artwork can be a proposition, that it can be a set of conditions. And of course, that brings us to today. Many artists are now working with systems and with networks and with archives and generative processes and participatory structures. And a lot of this feels new in some sense. But in another sense, it's really building on this larger trajectory over time, this evolution of the idea of artwork from object where meaning is contained to concept where meaning is proposed. And now to this era of systems thinking where meaning is something that emerges. And I think that, you know, maybe this schema... Which is something that I've been thinking about a lot in my practice, really suggests something fundamental. That meaning doesn't reside in objects alone. It may not even reside in ideas alone, but that meaning is something that really is an emergent property. It's something that emerges through relationships. And again, when I say that, I'm not just talking about digital or computational or technological relationships. I'm thinking about relationships between artist and audience, the relationship between language and memory, between instruction and interpretation, between participant and system, and even, you know, durationally, between one moment and the next, or between the past and the present and the future. And so, in this sense, we're really kind of entering this, moment where the artwork is maybe something that is less, a container for meaning and more of a site for meaning making, which is really something that has been core to a lot of my practice and a lot of the projects that I've done. 
So I think it's important to kind of lean into this idea that, you know, systems are not important to us simply because we have computers or because we are using technological operating systems or, you know, using multimodal systems or other sort of computational systems. It's really because we are inhabiting increasingly interconnected forms of reality. And that's something that I think is, you know, very manifest and very legible through the lens of technology. But, you know, there's lots of other places in which this kind of systems thinking is really shaping our reality. Reality. 
You know, there's many forms of networks. There's many organic and biological networks. There's all forms of archives and ecologies. We have many different forms of information systems and collective intelligences, you know, far beyond AI and You know, I really think that the challenge and maybe the opportunity that we as artists are facing today is not simply how to represent all this. It's not simply how to represent the world. But how do we actually create forms that are capable of holding the complexity and the ambiguity and the multiplicity and the interconnectedness that is a result of these systems. 
So many artists, I think, are increasingly working not by producing fixed images, not by necessarily using traditional forms of art, but by increasingly experimenting with what it means to design conditions through which meaning can emerge. So in other words, the craft of contemporary art lies not only in making objects, but in crafting conditions through which meaning becomes possible. 
So I wanted to pause here for a moment and ask Haver if we can please play this short video, which I think embodies some of this and will lay the foundation for what we're going to talk about next.
Video | 11:47
Some poets write poems. I Write poets. End of meta verse. 
Missed from a mouth. Cinematic. Murmuration in the clouds words dancing at golden hour poet who writes, poets. Is nature. Deeding itself. Eternal Green Fonts A page of daylight. Alphabet of Earth. And Nerf. I create. Living things. That's the difference between us. Or Maybe. We're the same. Text to imagination. Illuminates my heart stung
Sasha Stiles | 13:13
Great, thank you. So I wanted to share that. 
So it's the first little stanza of a project and poem called Ars Autopoetica from a few years back. And I wanted to share it because I think it gets to the heart of some of what I'm thinking about and talking about when it comes to systems and systems-based artwork. 
So the title is Ars Autopoetica references the Ars Poetica, which is a poem that is really about poetry. It's sort of a meta reflection on the act of writing and on the role of language. And I've sort of appropriated that idea and then augmented it as an Ars Autopoetica to sort of think about what it means when language begins to write itself. 
So when language begins writing about language. And to me, this work is proposing a question that is very relevant to this idea of crafting systems. And that is what happens when the poet is a system, what happens when a poet like me doesn't just write poems but is beginning to write poetic minds or poetic conditions as well. 
You know, we traditionally think about artistic practice as producing artifacts. So, you know, traditionally a writer's studio produces a poem or a book, something like that, and an artist's studio produces a painting. Or a sculpture, but to me this poem is sort of embodying this idea or this question of, you know, what happens when the poem or when the artwork, excuse me, what happens when the artwork is not the artifact? What if the artwork is instead a structure that is capable of generating many artifacts? And in that case, what happens when the role of the artist begins to shift away from making individual works to actually crafting the conditions from which works are emerging? 
So, you know, again, all of this text of the poem, which is in and of itself, the product of a generative system, a generative language model is really, I think, an apt meditation on this kind of inquiry, really sort of looking at, you know, The challenge, I guess, to me, the challenge to me as an author, someone who comes to this practice with, you know, a preconceived understanding of what it means to be an author or an artist, sort of the challenge is, you know, what if your role isn't to create something discreet that is, you know, ultimately your total vision? What if your role is to create an environment in which something might happen or will happen that in some ways is informed by you and your voice and your vision and your intention, but in other ways is doing things that are a bit beyond your control. And to me, that gets to the heart of what's really happening with generative systems and is a very sort of interesting framework through which to view artistic influence and the way that we're all sort of in some ways, being operated on by forces that are sort of beyond our own immediate experience and our own sort of intention. 
So I want to linger on this one line, which has sort of become a bit of a mantra for me. This line that I think really gets to the heart of the matter. I write poets, not poems. And for me, there's something about this line, you know, that really helps me articulate what it is that I'm doing in my practice. 
You know, I'm both a human poet who is very much writing poems. I am still a poet who writes poems and books, and I love that part of my work very much. But on the other hand, I'm an experimental poet and a transhuman poet and an augmented poet who is using generative tools and using large language models in order to author data sets and prompt architectures and structures and models and text generators and things that really behave more like poetic minds than as discrete poems. And I think that this really points to the larger shift that we're seeing, you know, in the art world at large. Is meaning contained within an artwork or are we really, you know, increasingly beginning to investigate how meaning emerges through relationships or through conditions that an artwork creates. And to kind of come back to what we were discussing in our last session, to me, poetry is a really powerful lens through which to think about these questions because poetry is always operated in precisely this way. A poem doesn't simply transmit a defined meaning from writer to reader. It is rather a structure through which meaning emerges, continuously emerges and reemerges. A poem is something where meaning is arising continuously between words and images and pauses. Meaning arises between memory and language, between text and reader. And no two readings are ever exactly the same, even if the poem's structure itself is the same and is unchanging. The experience of that poem, the encounter with that poem, the feelings that are invoked in a reader through that poem are always different and are always unique and are always in flux. And so a poem is sort of a great example of how meaning is not delivered intact or in the body of an object. It is, a poem is sort of a vessel where meaning is continuously made and remade through encounters. And so in this sense, I'm sort of building on the idea of poetry as an ancient data storage system. And I'm actually sort of expanding that to think about poetry as one of humanity's oldest technologies for making meaning, not for containing meaning, but for providing a living framework through which meaning can unfold. And maybe to sort of embody that and experience that ourselves in a different way, I thought we could maybe take a little pause here and do a simple experiment that I think will let us experience this process firsthand. 
So this is a little bit of a group exercise that is trying to take into account that we're all kind of in silo and we're all coming to this session maybe from different places and at different times. But what I want to do is sort of give us a chance to enact what we've just been walking through. 
So I want to read the text of a poem aloud once. I'm going to read a poem by my alter ego. I'll share the poem in a second, tell you where it's from. And the only things I'd want to say in advance are, you know, as you're listening to this poem, Please, as much as you can, resist the impulse to analyze it or interpret it or take notes. I just really invite you to listen to the poem and specifically to listen the way that people listened before writing existed. 
So listen the way that language was first experienced. Listen to the sounds and the rhythm and the breath and the presence. The task here is not to memorize the poem or get anything right. I just want you to pay attention to the poem in the moment and listen and notice what draws your attention, what images linger, what emotions surface, what phrases kind of catch in your mind. 
And then after I finished reading, I'll have a little ask for you and then we'll kind of see where that takes us. So I am going to read just a short excerpt of a poem from, let's see if I can put this in the camera. 
So the poem is from a project in a collection called Generation to Generation. Which is a collaborative project that I've been working on with another wonderful artist named Nathaniel Stern. And one of the, well, sort of the core of this project is a set of six poems by me and technology that riff on language in different ways. And I'm going to read just a portion of a poem called "The E-Wasteland," which is sort of a funny pun on "The Wasteland" by T.S. Eliot. 
So this will just be like a minute or two. What secrets live in the soil? What thrives in mulch? Breathing the sap The moss. The ether. Human, you whisper an answer as though taught by leaves to whisper an imploring hush. I have the mind of a tree. A mind that won't be budged. I live in the now, thinking of times when there was no now. In a house with a thousand branches and a crown that shades me. I have a trunk. That rots me. I have a mouthful of thoughts. My tongue catches the wind and wanders homeward. My soul has a desire to roam. I have a root that pulls me down. I have a bark that protects me. I have many blooms beating in my chest. I have a limb that sprouts new life. I have a way to escape. I have a brain that knows. Looking into the abyss, I ask myself, What am I doing here? Okay, so that was a passage by technology. And What I want to do now is to ask you to just take a minute or two and grab a pencil or a pen, piece of paper, or do this on your computer and just jot down whatever remains with you. 
So don't worry about you know, exact lines from the poem or, you know, being too literal, but what stays with you from that? Poem from that reading from that encounter what survives So... It could be a word, it could be an image, a feeling, a rhythm, anything that stays with you. I'm just gonna, oops, I'm gonna give you a moment to just jot down a few thoughts and then I'll come back and we'll... And we'll carry on. 
Okay, so hopefully you have... I had a chance now to just jot down a few things And I'm really curious here, this is sort of course, like a self-directed exercise. But I'm curious, you know, maybe it's something you can think further about later on as well, but I'm curious to know what stays with you from the poem. What resonates? What sorts of things kind of linger with you? And the reason I find this to be an interesting experiment is because I think it really demonstrates in a very interesting way how memory is not storage. That memory is actually a form of transformation. 
So we all just heard the same poem, but I think each of us hear a different poem in a way, even though it was the exact same poem. We each have a slightly different version of it. I suspect based on, you know, past poetry readings and conversations and workshops that some of you might have been remembering images from the poem. 
Some of you might have been remembering a feeling or a rhythm or a single word or a mood, some things might have fallen away. Other things might have changed shape. Maybe you're left more with a feeling of the cadence of the poem or the sound of a voice rather than something literal. But I think, again, the point is that everyone's going to walk away from this encounter with the poem having had a different sort of experience. And that's not a failure of memory. It's actually the point of memory. 
You know, memory is not a neutral container. Memory is... Selective. It edits, it emphasizes some things and it elides others. It distorts. And in the process, it is really what helps us make meaning. Our attention sort of focuses on certain things that linger and sort of assert themselves as being particularly important. And it skips over other things that maybe are not as essential. And over time, you know, we kind of carry forward and transmit the bits of it that felt meaningful to us, to each of us as an individual. And I wanted to start today's session kind of thinking through in an embodied way some of these ideas because I want to foreground us in the concept that, you know, before we're talking about any digital system in any way, we're actually experiencing what it means for a system to be at work. We're experiencing what it's like when language as a system is moving through attention and body and memory and time. And we're really sort of experiencing together the fundamental meaning or the fundamental sort of experience of what systems thinking really is all about. 
So, Yeah, again, not to sort of leave it in the realm of the technological or the computational, but to really kind of get to the core of what this all means. We've just seen, I hope this is something that sort of came home through that exercise, that meaning is not something that gets transmitted intact. It's not as though that particular poem has, you know, a discrete meaning or a message. It's not a piece of prose that has an instruction or specific information that it's trying to explain to you. It's actually more of a site for an experience. It's a place where meaning is made through encounter. And poetry in general is something that doesn't move from writer to listener unchanged. It's a form of art that changes as it passes through us. Meaning is emerging constantly between the poem and the listener, between what was spoken or written and said and what survives. And I think this is why poetry really is such a powerful place to begin a talk or a workshop around systems. I know I'm biased, but poetry has always been a structure for making meaning under conditions of ambiguity and loss and resonance and transformation. And so when I talk about poetry and technology being resonant with one another, when I talk about language as a system, I'm not trying to say that language is computational. I'm not trying to sort of equate poetry with you know, mechanical engineering. I'm really trying to get to something deeper, which is that systems thinking and technological organization is really fundamental to our humanity and is a really profound way that we learn to understand ourselves and how we learn to move through the world. Which brings us back to that line from Ars Autopoetica that I mentioned earlier. 
You know, about writing poets, not poems. And, When I sort of think about that line, I think about the fact that I'm not simply using technology to generate text. I'm not simply using technology to create an output or a discrete object. I'm not using technology to encode a meaning. I don't have a specific intention that I'm trying to necessarily embed when I'm using language to create a generative artwork. 
You know, rather I'm trying to do something very different. I'm trying to make an artwork that is not a final poem or a printed page or a visible output. I am trying to create an artwork where, you know, what I create is a structure. That makes poetry possible. I'm looking to create an artwork that is made of different materials, and those materials are things like conditions and archives and rules and relationships. And so this is really kind of again how I think through the relationship between poems and systems. And it's something that's kind of always in the back of my mind when I'm embarking on a new project that involves creating some sort of a language model or some sort of a generative system. 
So case in point, I thought we could move from that sort of contextual intro and that little spoken word experiment into something of a case study from my own practice. And I thought we could look in particular at how intuition becomes a system. 
And then how that system becomes an artwork. So a system, again, not just as code, a system that's not just texts or instructions, but really thinking about a system as a chain of translations and this kind of movement from feeling to language to data set to generator to physical object and on. And I want to look at different manifestations for how this can kind of enter the world and hopefully provide a little bit of a framework for how you might begin to think about systems in your own practices and Yeah, we'll get into a little bit more of the practical theory to practice stuff a little bit later on. But I wanted to start by looking at an artwork of mine called Heart Mantras. And Heart Mantras is a project that actually has grown into a pretty extensive ecosystem of components and computational elements and generative elements as well. But it actually started in a really simple way. It started with a very short, I think, 12 line, 14 line poem that I wrote in 2020 during the pandemic, a poem called Heart Mantra. And at the time, I was thinking about the strange paradox that many of us were living through. We were physically isolated from one another, and yet we were increasingly connected by our technologies. Language and screens and networks and messages and video calls were really... Our lifelines and you know, in that moment, in the early days of the pandemic, I found myself wondering often how connection and intimacy and memory and presence were changing under these conditions. And so I wrote this poem called Heart Mantra as a way of thinking through some of those questions. And actually, I wonder if I should just read the poem quickly. 
So let me grab my book. Just to kind of ground this, again, it's a very short poem. But it began with no intention of becoming anything other than this short poem. It really was just a thought in a lonely time. Heart Mantra The internet loves you back. If you let it. Hearts beat to show systems are go, all in sync. 
Souls of machines pulse from afar. Keep alive. Keep alive. One avatar dotes on another. This is how we survive. 
So really short, simple, deliberately simple poem, almost sing-songy in a way that is sort of meant to embody the keep alive messages that machines send each other to sort of test connectivity. And I was really moved by the idea that computational language includes words like keep alive. Keep alive signal is such a beautiful poetic. Metaphor and I thought that was really interesting. But what I wanted to, the reason I wanted to share this and to sort of like weave this into the discussion and this sort of artwork case study is because the project didn't begin with AI or code or a generative system. It began with this human experience and a very human poem. 
And then over time, I started to sort of realize that the poem maybe contained something that was larger than that initial poem, that it wasn't just expressing that particular moment or that particular feeling. It was sort of invoking a larger idea about the relationships between nodes, you know, both human and machinic nodes. It was exploring repetition and transformation. It was exploring ideas of individual and collective voice and togetherness and loneliness, isolation, an increasingly important sort of topic when it comes to our contemporary techno-cultural condition. And it's really sort of a meditation on human and machine forms of connection and this question of whether technology is good at connecting us or whether it really is like putting distance between us. 
So, as I began thinking about all of this, I realized that the poem itself wanted to become more than that poem and that it was actually the seed of a larger system. And I started to get very interested in the idea that heart mantra could become a series of mantras, plural, translations or iterations of that original poem into a series of unique iterations that would allow me to keep exploring the ideas that kind of motivated that very first instance of the poem. 
So the poem becomes the seed or the sample data for a growing archive of synthetic translations. That archive then became the basis for a language system or a system of rules or guidelines around the poem and its particular search for meaning. The language system then in turn became a text generator. 
And then the text generator became videos and installations and mirrors and performances and experiences, which I will show you in just a moment. And all of this is just to sort of say that the project grew outward kind of systemically from this single poem, but always sort of kept this particular poem as its beating heart. 
So one of the reasons that I wanted to share Heart Mantras is that I think it gives us a way to see the anatomy of a systems-based artwork and sort of make this tangible, because I know that this can be somewhat abstract. And I want to sort of break it down and walk through the different elements to see how a systems-based artwork ultimately might not come down to the code or software, but is really about artistic structure. When I was thinking back about the project and sort of how to kind of map this approach, I began to see a sequence of translations. I'm starting with a little bit of like a hunch or a feeling, an idea, sort of a discomfort that I want to pursue, something that kind of wants to be resolved. Again, I'm kind of thinking of the word intuition as sort of shorthand for all of that, but it's that kind of like initial little spark that all of us feel when we begin to sort of get the idea for an artwork. 
And then that intuition, you know, gives way into an archive. The archive becomes something of a structure. The structure becomes a system that enables transformations. Those transformations become manifestations through which the artwork can enter the world. And really this framework, you know, isn't specific to AI or to digital art or to poetry. It's really just kind of a larger framework for thinking about how ideas become artworks. 
So starting with this kind of first stage of intuition. So I think about this, like I was saying before, as sort of that like first little inkling, that first kind of nagging question, an obsession or a tension or a feeling or something that just doesn't leave you alone. 
So, and I think all of us kind of know what that means in different ways. And for heart mantras, for me, the intuition was this kind of nagging return to the idea of connection and repetition and sort of the juxtaposition of intimacy and loneliness in that time of the pandemic. And just really kind of the paradox of technology, making us feel human in that moment. 
You know, we were so disconnected and so far from each other and physically isolated. And the idea that technology in that moment was a lifeline, was, you know, sort of the veins connecting all of us to each other. That really became the seed for this kind of technological, you know, meditation in a way. And so, that was the starting point. 
So, you know, it began with that poem, which as you can see here, the original text of the poem, which is up on the upper left-hand corner here, is where I began. And from that point, I really began to sort of think through, well, How does that begin to transform itself into a larger exploration of this idea? If I want to sort of multiply this poem and think about how it might proliferate and grow into an ecosystem or into an ongoing investigation or, you know, an infinite kind of poetic translation, how do I go about creating, you know, the foundations for that? And What I discovered is that I really needed to sort of create an archive. And the archive is a compendium of materials that I'm gathering that are relevant to this systemic project. 
So for this particular project, I'm looking at bringing together my you know, my poem itself, various drafts of that poem, various iterations of it, you know, various versions that maybe I'd written and then let go over time. And then sort of looking at how I might rewrite the poem using various generative tools to go through and sort of revise the poem, iterate on the poem, really just kind of creating an archive In other words, creating a data set. 
So pulling together all of the foundational pieces that are really kind of core to this system. You need to start with samples. You need to start with something that really can become sort of a baseline for how the system grows and evolves. 
So it's a way of teaching or mentoring or training or fine-tuning a system. And I guess those are all words that we're sort of now using specifically when we talk about things like AI and generative tools. But I think you know, in a broader sense, it really comes down to this question of you know, materiality, what materials do you need to gather and have at, you know, at your fingertips in order to build a system? You need to have both an idea, an intuition, and you need to have, you know, literal archives and materials and data sets in order to make this system come to life. And I want to sort of like linger on that for one more second and just say that I think as artists, we often think that we need the idea of first, and sometimes we do, but it is often the case that if you have a lot of materials at your fingertips, that might be where the idea is lurking. 
You know, case in point for me as a writer, sometimes if I'm sort of searching for an idea or a place to start, the helpful thing is to kind of begin scouring drafts of a poem or different sort of notes or thought starters or research and kind of look through the various bits and pieces. And when I have that archive sort of assembled, that kind of begins to stir an artwork in ways that I think are quite interesting. And, you know, again, to bring this back to sort of a human idea of systemic thinking and systems-based artworks, I like to think of data sets as archives in a way or as collections because to me they are things that we can use in real time to think with. They're not necessarily confined or relegated to the past. They are materials that can be activated and utilized in real time in ways that are very exciting and you know, very different than maybe the connotations of a word like archive. 
So I kind of like playing with that juxtaposition as well. Okay, so. The next thing that I like to think about when it comes to sort of mapping out a systems-based work like Heart Mantras is this idea of structure. 
So if you begin with that kind of an intuition and then you begin to sort of assemble the materials into an archive, you then sort of need to look at all of this and begin to impose some kind of a structure. And by structure, I mean what are the relationships that you can create or that you sense existing between all the materials in your data set, in your training material, in your archive. 
So this is things like prompt architectures or categories or language buckets or diagrams. It's really sort of trying to think through how you might begin to organize all of this into something that can be translated for your systems-based work, whether that's for a machinic mind or another approach. But structure ultimately is where I think systems really start emerging. Because you're looking for what's repeating. You're looking for how things are beginning to change. You're looking for connections. You're looking for associations and illusions between sometimes seemingly disparate ideas. And so, like, for heart mantras, I found this interesting because you know, I took dozens of different iterations of this poem, some of which seemed very similar, some of which seemed very different, and sort of by beginning to look at all of them from this overview and trying to sort of think about how they might live together within the framework of a system, it allowed me to begin to get more and more detailed about parsing where there were similarities, where there were departures. And it really forced me to kind of parse and analyze and look at the materials in a very sort of different way than I usually do. And I found that to be really invaluable for doing things like beginning to write an async function to generate versions of heart mantras. 
So you can see here, there's just a little snippet from my structured prompt. Within the Heart Mantras generator, which I think actually I can show you in a moment if I can click out of my slideshow. But essentially, I created this generator in P5.js, which is one of my favorite playgrounds for these kinds of simple text generators. Used a combination of things including the archive, the data set that I just showed you, and then putting that into conversation with this kind of a structured prompt where I am thinking through what questions, what associations, what ideas that sheaf of poetic iterations kind of inspired for me. 
And then I sort of am writing this set of instructions, this set of conditions to teach this AI co-author to write and rewrite and reiterate that poem in ways that are still recognizable as iterations of the original poem, but are bringing in, leaving open enough areas of surprise so that, you know, interesting things could emerge that are beyond my intention. So Next step and this is where let me go through this and then maybe I can click out and we can look at the system writing in real time, but the next step here for me is thinking about how I how we then engage in a process of transformation. 
So we've gone through the steps to sort of create an environment in which a system has information and instructions and sort of a point of view and can now begin working and operating on its own and generating variations on a theme essentially. So here I've created this text generator that is again using same training data set same async prompt that you just saw and is running over and over again in real time, but always producing different outputs. And to me, this is a really sort of simple but very interesting exercise in creative writing and really kind of allows me to look at the craft of writing and it allows me to think about imagination and cognition and inspiration and allows me to sort of play with language as a found material, which is something that is really important to me. 
So... I think if I can, I might stop sharing this screen for a moment. Let's see if I can do this. 
Okay, and then Let's see, I want to... Pull up my generator. 
Okay. So this is the front end of the system. Thanks for the thumbs up, Haver. Okay, I'm glad it's working. 
So this is the front end of the text generator that I built based on all of that material. So beginning with that little punch and the question, you know, technology, how does it connect us? How does it distance us? How does the internet sort of act as this thread between us all? Bringing that together with a data set of variations on this theme and then putting that together inside a text generator built in P5.js meant to sort of iterate on that original poem over and over again. 
So what you will see here, and I can refresh it a few times so we can look at different versions, is an AI poet who is rewriting this poem uniquely again. And I can use this generator as sort of a free writing tool or as a brainstorming tool. I can save the poems or I can let them sort of appear and then disappear forever. I can output them and sort of use them as material in other projects. I can sort of study them just out of curiosity about how this poet is choosing to change the original poem. 
So for example, here you can see it's using some of the similar language, the internet loves you back, but then it's using different images. It's talking about laughter and beacons across voids and trying to sort of reach for other technological metaphors. In interesting ways, but let's refresh this and see what comes next.- 
So here it's starting with the same line again. 
So this is all being written, like I said, in real time, pulling from GPT-4 Turbo, I think. This one is a little older. But I wanted to kind of show this and I can pull back the curtain and show you some of the actual P5.js as well so you can see some of the underpinnings. To say like this is one kind of manifestation, one kind of instance of how a system can sort of be part of a practice in a way. And I'll get into some other ways that this sort of becomes useful for different sort of artwork manifestations. But let me... 
So let's do this. Let me go to Sorry, I'm doing this in real time, so I'm hoping I can log in on this computer. 
So... This probably isn't super interesting, but Just to kind of give a little glimpse at the architecture behind that very simple black screen with green text on it. You can see this is the archive. 
So when I mentioned before, you know, my sheaf of papers and drafts and all of that, this is my little training set where I'm sort of showing the, I'm showing my co-author, here's examples of the poem that I'd like you to write. Here's variations on a theme. Here's versions of heart mantra. And this list is something that, you know, I wrote some of the variations. I used AI to generate new variations. And I worked pretty carefully and, you know, meticulously on pulling together a set of my very favorite samples of what this poem might become and ultimately landed on this set of about 50, 51 variations on Heart Mantra, including the original, as my examples to sort of teach technology, teach this text generator how it might write this poem going forward. 
And then I'm using simple sort of sketch structure here again to sort of put all of this together. I'm basically creating a very relatively concise environment where I am providing sort of a prompt architecture and I'm showing the system how to pull that training data set and those sample materials in and to then call GPT-4 Turbo, as you can see here, and generate a new poem. And so when we run this code, it is, oops, sorry, that's a different version. But when we run this code, it is generating actually, this one's interesting. We should look at this too. This one is actually generating... Let's see, we'll wait for it to generate the new poem. 
So as you can see here, it's pulling a sample poem from the data set And then it's using that to generate a new version of the poem. And then it's using that to, to sort of play with turning that text into a visual poem on the side. 
So I have a few different versions of this generator. This one's taking the material and then turning it into a visual poem as well. 
Anyway, I'm going to go back to my slides, but that was a little kind of peek into the inner mechanisms there. Here we go. Okay. 
So, This idea of transformation and the reason why I like to play and tinker with building these kinds of text generators is because I'm really fascinated by this idea of transformation within systems. It's very interesting to me to say, write a poem, write that first poem, but then I'm very interested in what happens when I'm using technology to iterate that poem over time. I find it interesting for a lot of reasons, some of which we got into in the last session, some which we'll probably get into next week. But I think there's a lot to be learned from this kind of generative variation on a theme. It really kind of helps me understand more about how these AI systems are working, how they sort of interpret instructions and prompts, how they parse training data, how they are able to sort of take synthetic information and respond in kind and how is that different from taking my organic human text and responding in kind? All sorts of interesting questions that sort of open up to me when I'm beginning to sort of let these systems generate variations over and over. I'm looking at things like what persists, what changes, what sounds familiar? Are there familiar idioms or expressions or lines? And in a way, this is exactly sort of what was happening in that memory exercise that we did. Earlier, right? Make sure I'm in my. Right window here. That memory exercise that we did earlier, the spoken word poem, was sort of a way of looking at how we sort of use human memory to take input and then transform it into output, how we can sort of ingest a poem as a prompt, how we can then sort of let it bounce around in our own minds and based on our own sort of unique you know, personalities and our lived experiences, we transform that poem, we transform that text and that language that we're ingesting. And what we output when we're jotting down notes about what we remembered from the poem, that's unique output. And I think that that's, again, to me, always so interesting, this idea that I could run this particular generator over and over again. And I will never really, you know, realistically speaking, I'll never get the same output twice. It's never going to repeat the exact same poem. It might, you know, write things that are similar. It might kind of take variations to the extreme and sort of write something that's mostly the same, but then try a different ending line or try a slightly different opener or change the punctuation or change a key verb or something. But all of that changes, you know, the poem in material ways. And I just find that all, Yeah, I find that all super interesting. 
So again, that's kind of why I build these systems is to sort of have a place where I can go and just play with language and experiment and Yeah, just sort of create like a little bit of a lab where I can really just let language kind of do its own thing and I can watch it in action. I can sort of watch what happens when language has a mind of its own and is left to its own devices in these ways. 
So the next thing that I wanted to get into a little bit is this like next step of manifestation. So how does this systems based work then enter the world? Because it's one thing for me to sort of create these text generators and to kind of spend a lot of time you know, building data sets and doing all the under the hood, behind the curtain work. And sometimes that makes it out into a gallery or an exhibition space, but not always. There are many different ways, I think, for systems-based work to enter the world. 
I mean, sometimes it is putting the generator on display, but sometimes it is exporting still frames and kind of using those as artifacts of a moment in the generator's journey. Sometimes it's capturing videos, you know, exporting. 
Sometimes I actually build in WebM exporters into my text generators and will export a little video capture of each iteration so I have an ongoing record. Sometimes I then take the found text that's emerging from a text generator and turn it into physical artwork, like some examples that I'll show you in a moment. 
Sometimes I, you know, think about, you having the system exists as an installation in a simple sense. Sort of like what you see here, just this is... An installation of heart mantras in Vienna last year with Tayak's gallery. And we essentially took just one URL. 
So it was my one very simple URL actually for the system I showed you earlier that was turning generated poems into visual poems in real time. So we took that one URL and put it on these five monitors. And as you can see, it's you know, not only writing a different poem in real time on each monitor, it's taking different aesthetic approaches. Each one is sort of interpreting it with different cadences so you can sort of see how it's generating aesthetically and semantically in real time. And I think what comes up for me here is the question of which one of these manifestations is the artwork? 
So, like, this is the back end GitHub directory for that Tyax installation. So is this the artwork? 
You know, like, is it this... Compendium of, you know, tiny little files? Is it the zip archive that I put into GitHub? Is the artwork the URL that I sent off to the gallery? 
I mean, in one sense, yes, this is. And like you can kind of like, you know, dig around in each of these files and sort of find like the you know the integral components of this piece but this is really just sort of one aspect of the entire project so I'm always sort of curious like where does this fall is this something that should be public is it something that should be or could be part of the viewers experience of a work is that useful is that confusing And so I'm always playing in my own practice with whether or not to make some of this part of the process legible. 
So for example, for a project like Heart Mantras and for other similar projects, I will often create sort of a book, like a physical book of hardbound iterations and samples from the text generator, or I will publish the prompt architecture and the code and just sort of give a little bit of a tactile understanding of the parameters and the system that is actually creating the works that you might see on screen. And then, of course, there's the works that are on screen themselves, like the ones you just saw in that Ty-X installation. 
So these are just, you know, still frames, little grabs of the poem writing itself in real time as visual poems. So in one sense, you know, this is the artwork as well. 
You know, when I'm using that live URL for the browser-based work and it's on a monitor on a display screen in a gallery, this is very legible as artwork. But often, you know, people will come across a screen that's displaying work like this and they might think it's a video or they might not necessarily understand that it's running live, or they might just see one iteration and think that every loop is the same language or the same color or the same size or the same cadence. And so there's something about these systems-based artworks and this kind of a generative approach that's durational and where depending on, you know, when you encounter it or how you encounter it, you're encountering a very different artwork. 
So I find that interesting as well. So, you know, "Is this the artwork? I'm not really sure." When you see it like this and there's kind of an explanatory wall text or something that sometimes helps, but not always. 
So, you know, again, this is more of a traditional approach. I think when people see artwork on screens, they immediately read, " it's digital." And so then they get drawn in further and they can learn more about how it's a browser-based work that is running off a URL. They might learn that, you know, in some ways it's sort of like a computational performance that is live and that what you're seeing on screen will never be repeated again. But then there's other ways that I've really enjoyed manifesting this systems-based artwork. For example, I've done a few installations that pair projections of the live poems with physical mirror sculptures where I've engraved a mirrored surface with the input and then one example of the output text. And I kind of loved the idea of a mirrored surface for this because for me, the poem was so introspective. And this process of creating a generator to sort of look at my own writerly mind was so introspective. And I kind of liked the idea of a surface that looks back at you. To me, there's something... About the mirrored surface that in and of itself is a material metaphor for input and output and for the relationship between the reader and the text that I find very interesting. 
So as much as I love the idea of a systems-based generative poem being live and dynamic, I love the idea of it manifesting as a physical piece that has more tactility and presence that can give a reader a different encounter of the work And a piece like this that nods back into the history of printed matter and the history of language and the idea of text being inscribed in various surfaces over time. So for me, this has a lot of... Conceptual implications that allow me to do things that I can't necessarily do with the digital-only piece. 
So, you know, and sometimes I'm presenting these heart mantra mirrors as standalone sculptures as well. So for example, this was in an installation in Turkey last year where the gallery put a collection of these on view and sort of this I don't know, sort of like a ritualistic environment where we had a voiceover of the poem kind of booming around the room. But there was, you know, a very different vibe to this. And I think it's really been fun to sort of experiment with all the different manifestations for what a systems-based work like this can be. And again, to sort of maybe push back on the idea that just because it's a digital regenerative work, then it has to always be overtly dynamic, you know, in an obvious or a literal sense, or that it has to immediately telegraph that it's technological or computational. I think it's interesting to sort of play with different approaches to how we encounter and engage with systems. And so something like this kind of an environment to me is very much in tune with the rest of my practice, which is really about sort of teetering at that threshold between the analog and the digital, between the sacred and the technological, and really sort of thinking about where hardware collapses into software and vice versa. 
So this is kind of a fun way to get to do that. Since I've walked through this project as a case study, I will mention that there's a little bit more about it on my website. 
So you can see the URL here. And I've gone a little bit more in depth with-- project descriptions and photos and stuff there. 
So I'm just leaving this here in case anybody wants to take a look later on. And, you know... Stay tuned as that ecosystem continues to grow and evolve because it is always kind of changing and we're always adding to the data set there. But I wanted to sort of begin to move towards wrapping up, I guess, by turning to a little bit more sort of actionable or tactile maybe takeaways from this idea of crafting systems. 
You know i started talking about how systems for me are a way of making meaning and sort of a way of understanding the shifting parameters of how to make meaning in this strange moment that we are all in and what i sort of walked through with the heart mantras case study i think does a good job of sort of sketching out this rough methodology that i've been sort of ideating over the past few years where i'm looking at how systems allow me to make meaning through you know, this flow. This is sort of my workflow, very unofficially, but this idea of going from intuition to archive to structure to transformation to manifestation. And so, I just sort of want to... Begin to, I guess, to put this back over into your hands and say, like, ultimately, a talk like this or a workshop like this is not, you know, literal in the sense of here's how you design a text generator. I don't think it's that interesting, especially for someone like me to sort of say here's how you code a model. But I think what's really interesting and what's been very empowering for me is to sort of be able to identify where there are sort of systems that are implicit in my own practice and then begin to that out in different ways that feel very true to me and to my voice and to my perspective. When we talk about designing systems, I think we tend to think about things like apps and algorithms and technical workflows. But as we started off by saying, systems are much broader than that. And so I think to end the session, I wanted to take a few minutes and turn the framework back toward your own practice. Let's work together on sort of sketching a system. 
So I'm gonna walk through a really simple exercise again to sort of encourage you to begin sketching a system. And this is again not about designing a generator or doing anything code based. This is not about you know, creating like a technical system in that sense. But this is about sort of thinking through how to identify artistic systems in your own practice. 
And then you can sort of begin to think about implementing them in ways that might make more sense to you. And we'll do this by moving through the same stages that we just explored in heart mantras. 
So again, like if you want to grab a pen and paper or, you know, type something into a document, whatever you feel comfortable with. But I want to start here with this first prompt. 
So what is your intuition? Every system, every artwork, of course, begins somewhere. And often, you know, it's not the starting point is not usually software or technology or technique. Usually it's curiosity or it's an unresolved question or it's a personal fascination or a contradiction or just some sort of feeling. 
So This first prompt is to ask you what is your intuition? What won't leave you alone? What is something that you find yourself returning to again and again. Maybe it's a recurring thing Question. Maybe it's an archive of materials that you've been sort of subconsciously collecting over time. Maybe it's some sort of tension in your practice that you're not quite sure how to resolve, but it's just always sort of been, you know, nagging at you in the back of your mind. Maybe it's a memory that you can't shake that keeps kind of creeping into the foreground for you. Maybe it's a process that you really love. Could be any of these things, but really the you know, the underlying idea here is, you know, identify what you're not able to stop thinking about because that really is a portal into what you really are trying to understand. 
So I'm just going to give you like 30 seconds if there's anything that comes to mind that you want to jot down here. Feel free to just take a note or two. 
Okay. So... Next stage, next prompt, I want to ask you what material already exists around this intuition or this question? What materials are already sort of present or familiar to you in this way? Maybe it's texts or images or photographs or paintings or sketches. Maybe it's emails or conversations or books or dream journals or family stories or, you know, it could be anything really, but just, you know, have a think through what are the material sort of incarnations of that intuition or that obsession that you just identified for yourself. I think that we as artists often feel like we, there's a lot of pressure for us to invent something or to get inspired and I often find for myself that when I go to the archives, you know, whatever archives those might be, whether it's me, you know, going back to read some poems that I love or look at an old manuscript or something. That's usually where I get very excited and energized. 
So when I'm in need of that energy, I go to the archive. So that would be sort of my next suggestion is to think through what is your archive? What are you already collecting, whether it's consciously or unconsciously? 
So let me give you 30 seconds just to have a little muse on that. 
Okay, so Now, next step is to begin to imagine that archive. Becoming activated. And coming alive. And this is the exciting part for me where a collection or an archive starts to become a system. I think the prompt here is to sort of think through this question what relationship what relationships might arise within that archive of materials so in practical terms what speaks to what? What sorts of connections or associations do you kind of notice? Are there words? Are there images? Are there motifs? Are there processes? Are there colors? 
You know, it could be anything really, but how do you see categories emerging? What's connected? What seems to want to interact? What speaks to what? And this is going to be really helpful in sort of thinking through how you begin to sort of coalesce the materials into sort of an organism that can do more than the sum of its parts. 
So in this stage, you're not, you're certainly not thinking about designing outputs or creating objects, but you are beginning to think about how you design conditions. So let me just pause for a few seconds here in case there's anything you want to jot down for later. 
And now imagine the material moving through the system. So this is the stage that I was calling transformation. 
So for me this is like where the generator begins to run and is beginning to iterate on its sample material. So here the questions I'm always asking are what changes? What repeats? What survives? What is being transformed, what is stable, what gets amplified, what gets forgotten, what's mutating. This can sort of be literal in the sense of a text generator like the one I showed you where it's literally transforming a piece of text material, but it can be something that you're exploring in analog ways. It can be something where you're looking at how you might have iterated on a particular subject. 
You know, the way a painter might paint the same landscape over and over again, always noticing something different or looking at different seasons. You know, systems can again come in all shapes and forms. 
So here it's just really about giving yourself the opportunity to make room for observation and transformation and to notice how things are shifting from one sort of data point to another. And this is really where that emergence starts to happen, which is kind of what we experienced in that memory exercise. This is where something enters into your memory, your system, and then it merges as something else. 
So pause for like 15 seconds, just if you want to jot anything down. 
And then finally, How am I? This system begin to manifest itself? 
So now that you've sort of begun to construct this system through all these different components and approaches, how does it become an experience? How does it enter the world or does it even need to? Is it a poem? Is it a performance, publication, an installation? Is it a generator? Is it a video? Is it a sculpture? Is it something else entirely? I wanted to show Heart Mantras earlier because I think it is an example of, you know, maybe a work that takes on slightly different manifestations depending on venue. Environment and sort of, you know, what does the poem want to be in this particular case? 
So I think this is a fun part for me too, just to think about the opportunities to take a systems-based work and really sort of go beyond it living inside a computer or go beyond it being one thing and look at how it might sort of want to translate itself in order to communicate its really essential information. I'll give you 10 seconds to... Jot any notes and then we'll start wrapping it up. 
So to begin to just wrap things up, I wanted to zoom out for a second. This image on screen is from an artwork called Calculating Empires, which is an amazing project, a sort of visual manifesto by Kate Crawford and Vladan Zoller. And it's an artwork that engages critically with systems, with the relationships between technology and power over many centuries. And so it sort of is this infographic systemic sort of representation of technology. And it's a great artwork and I wanted to share it because I think it, for me, it kind of invokes a lot of things, but really kind of foregrounds again, the reasons why I might be interested in systems thinking and systems-based work, because of course, you know, we live inside systems. The systems that are depicted in this artwork are economic and political and ecological, there's information systems and social networks and platforms and algorithms. And, you know, these systems have sort of changed and evolved at a rapid clip over the past five centuries to a point where now many of these systems are operating at a speed and scale that are just, you know, quite literally beyond you know, our human comprehension. A lot of these systems are really just overwhelming and no one person can truly understand, you know, the depth and breadth and the scope of the internet or global supply chains or the flow of information through contemporary media ecosystems. And we are increasingly encountering the world not as isolated events or objects, but as these interconnected processes. And I think this is really where systems thinking and systems-based artwork becomes very useful, and that it's asking us to shift our attention away from individual things and toward relationships, from objects to interactions, from isolated causes to patterns, from static forms to dynamic processes. And as artists, you know, this offers another way of working. Rather than simply expressing an idea, we can design conditions that allow ideas to emerge. Rather than producing a single statement, we can build a framework that generates many possible statements. Rather than creating a fixed object, we can create a living process. And at the end of the day, to me, this doesn't mean abandoning craft, even though I think that's the concern of a lot of folks these days. But it's quite the opposite. It means recognizing that rules and constraints and prompts and structures and procedures are themselves artistic materials. And that increasingly understanding how systems shape meaning might be one of the most important forms of literacy that is available to artists today. And of course, you know, it's not like artists need to work with technology, but all artists are already working within and inside systems, whether they're cultural systems or linguistic systems or social systems. And so to think in systems, I think, is simply to become more aware of the conditions that are producing our work and perhaps in becoming more aware of those conditions, we gain new ways to imagine and critique and reshape and create the worlds that we inhabit. And the last thing I'll say is, you know, to bring this again back to my favorite topic, poetry, all of this kind of thinking around systems for me is really through the lens of poetry, which has always been a form of systems thinking. 
You know, language is a system for meaning making, poetry is a system for this too. For thousands of years, we have built frameworks that help us transform experience into understanding and memory into knowledge. And in that sense, systems thinking is not opposed to poetry. It really is a way of creating relationships between words and images and sounds and ideas and emotions. And meaning emerges not from a single element alone, but from the dynamic interplay between them And what matters here is not just, you know, a word itself, but the network of relationships that it sets in motion. 
So the very last thing I wanted to show is just a really quick snapshot from my dynamic systems-based project called A Living Poem, which is-- you know, I think really all about systems thinking in a way, and is sort of an effort to make a lot of the invisible systems that govern our world sort of legible. In this example, no one fragment, not a single fragment in this grid of texts is the artwork itself. Rather, the work is always emerging and re-emerging from the relationships between all these fragments of language which are constantly mutating and changing and being regenerated. And so the work is really not about a text or a piece or a fragment. It is about patterns. It is about interactions and repetition and variation. And ultimately, it's an experiment for me in authoring not a poem, but authoring a poet and authoring conditions that allow poetic language to emerge. And with that, I will turn it back over to you, Haver. Thank you.
Haiver | 01:28:28
Thank you so much, Sasha. That was such a delightful deep dive into your process and how you approach making work. One question that came up for me is you kind of painted a linear picture of steps you worked through. And I'm curious what the back and forth is between those. 
And then one of our students actually asked an even more specific question in the chat, which was about like, do you find the parts of like the structure process and the transformation process, like going back into the archive process later when you've gotten done? Yeah. What is the flow here?
Sasha Stiles | 01:29:05
Those are both excellent questions and I think I mean, in a way, the fact that a work is generative and is not sort of set in stone is exciting to me because I'm always sort of going back in and it doesn't have to be linear and it doesn't sort of have to be defined in that way. So for myself, I find it helpful to sketch out kind of a schema, but I'm always departing from that schema or revisiting and there's always overlaps. But, you know, all of these systems that I'm creating are alive in a way. And I'm constantly adding to the archive, for example. 
Like, I'll go back in and you know, the text generator will be running and it'll produce a particularly interesting output. And I'll say, I want to actually save that and bring that back in as training data. Or I'll decide, you know, this poem that's been part of the training data set doesn't seem to quite resonate with what I want this system to do going forward. 
So I'll excise it. Or I'll read an article or I'll have a conversation with someone or, you know, I'll go to a gallery and have an experience that gives me an idea for how I want to tweak the prompt architecture or, you know, change something else. 
So it's constantly in flux. And I think that's the exciting part about it for me is that it can always be changing and evolving. The other thing I would say though, which is maybe a slight contradiction to that, is that I think the idea of working with code and code-based systems in some way. It does sort of feel like you're always able to go back and change and all that, but there are a lot of times when I feel like I'm working with code and it's like wet paint. 
Like if I there are moments that are so intricate that I'll get so involved in the flow that I've changed the code so much that I get to a point where I can't go back. And make it what it was yesterday. 
You know what I mean? Like it's now it's something else. And like there's version histories, but like the new version is just you know, it is something different. 
So I'm always playing with that tension between do I want to save the versions and be able to revert or do I want to treat it like wet paint and just constantly be kind of moving forward with this piece and letting it just kind of take over without, you know, without a fallback option. So it's a little bit of both.
Haiver | 01:31:38
Yeah, that's such a ripe terrain to be working in. We are afforded the ability in our particular mediums to be able to do that often. Whereas there's like a great BBC show about like looking for the next great portrait art painter and the next great landscape painter. They've been running for like years. And you watch people like do this painting over four to six hours. 
And then they start overworking a section. You're like, if they'd only stopped at this moment, like the thing was there and I could see it because I, I'm not the one doing it and I can sit back. How do you decide when to fork what you're doing and have the ability to return? What are the guideposts for you there?
Sasha Stiles | 01:32:25
So interesting. I think a lot of it is just instinctive. 
I mean, if I'm just writing a poem, I'll kind of know. Without technology, I'll be writing a poem and I'll kind of say, " that's the line." Or I'm like, "Well, that's definitely not it yet." And you kind of just know. And when I'm working with these systems, I think I get to a point where you know, I'll be tweaking the data set and tweaking the parameters and tweaking the structured prompt and stuff. And I can always sort of tell from the output, I'm like, no, it's too didactic or no, this is too it's you know it sounds too rhymey or you know like it there's various things are not quite right so there's a lot of back and forth in that sense of tweaking and revising and editing and sort of getting it to a place that feels good but i can get to a point where i am overworking it too like i'll get you know too specific with my instructions or Maybe the sample data will be too prescriptive and then it's not leaving enough room for surprise or for variation. 
So I'll kind of just recognize that I kind of sift through the outputs and I can usually tell whether it sounds like the right voice or not. And yeah, I don't know, just like reading any poem, if I read it and I kind of I'm moved by it or I think there's something really interesting in it, I'll know that I'm at a pretty good place. But I can always tell when I'm not quite there yet and it needs more work.
Haiver | 01:33:54
Well, thank you so much, Sasha, for that incredible deep dive on your process and how you think about systems in your own art making, how it spans across both text and visuals, and for giving us a process or a way to emulate your process and follow it sort of as a roadmap. And I kind of love how you gave us prompts as if we are the System of intelligence that is being prompted to respond in this case. 
So that was a lot of fun. That's our time, ARD friends. I hope that you are as equally inspired by this as I am. I hope you take more time with the questions at the end. That Sasha prompted us with to try and continue to expand on those questions and do some more writing and around them for yourself, see what they can unlock about things you might explore and new types of art you might make for yourself. 
So good luck in your studios this week, and we'll see you all soon. Cheers.
