Haiver | 00:00
I aren't friends. Good to be back with you today for our third and final part in this quarter focused on the artist statement. I hope that some of you got a chance to go back and take a look at your free writing from earlier. In our earlier first two parts that you came back and started to piece that together into something more whole and complete. Today we're going to look at revision. We're going to dip our toes into it and come up with a couple different tools that'll be useful to you as you're thinking about how to refine all the material you've been gathering so far this quarter. 
And then next quarter, when we get together for our mentor meetings, this artist writing that you've been doing this artist statement revision is what we will be tackling together and workshopping in our mentor meetings. So I am really looking forward to doing that with all of you. 
So how to write about your art, part three, the artist statement. And You've been learning to think about your art writing as giving someone a roadmap. All right, a map doesn't spell out the journey. All right, a map is simply showing you where things are so you can navigate between places yourself. You're essentially equipping viewers who know nothing about you in most cases, don't know you from Adam, don't have a reason to care. They wandered into this gallery or this space, they stumble across it. We It is in our best interest to treat our potential viewers who we don't know as interesting, curious people who are eager to discover something new and exciting to them. But we have to just give them, we have to help show them the way into the work. We have to give them a chart, a map. For this journey that they need to go on when they encounter the work. That's what we've been learning to do by talking about what is it, what does it mean, and why does it matter in our first three sections. I love these two quotes here. "You never know what you will learn until you start." until you start writing. Then you discover truths you never knew existed. That's the writer Anita Bruckner. Then Kevin Ashton wrote, "Nothing begins good. Everything good begin, but everything good begins. Everything can be revised, erased, or rearranged later. The courage of creation is to is making bad beginnings. And you've already done the hardest part. This quarter. You began. You made a start. You put some bad words down on the page. They didn't have to begin good, right? But everything good begins. And you got through the hardest part of simply making that start. I love this Anita Bruckner quote, because it really emphasizes that we learn what we think through the act of writing, right? We discover truths you never knew existed. We think we know what our work is about, but as I think many of us have been experiencing in our cohort sessions as we get feedback on our work and then get to the section where we have to explain what our intent and the meaning of the work is and the effect we want to have on viewers, we discover, I find in my own personal work as an artist, that I don't know it as clearly as I thought I did. And that's, we've been saying all quarter, is what makes writing about your art hard, because you actually have to learn what it's about and why it functions the way it does to take the intuitive things we're doing and put words to them. And this is not mysteriously harder for you as artists than it is for any other writer to sit down and write. It is difficult work. But you've done the most difficult part, which is to begin. And the good news is, as we will practice today, everything can be revised, erased, or rearranged later. But I really admire you all for your courage in the act of creation here to make some bad beginnings and to do so together. As we move into our first exercise, our warm-up exercise for today, I want to just linger on this quote from Susan Sontag, the great theorist and writer from the mid-20th century. We lack words and we have too many of them. We lack words and we have too many of them. I love a piece of writing that's a contradiction in itself. Here, it really gets at the idea that we don't know how to say what we are trying to say, and then we use far too many words to say it. That's what I often find makes for bad writing when it is published, when it's printed. It doesn't matter if it's bad in the draft stage, but it does matter when it gets to the final readers out in the world. And if there's no idea there because we haven't found the words, because we lack the words to articulate it, and we never worked our way down to the essence, the idea that needed to be most importantly expressed about our work, then we spend too many words saying nothing. And so finding the right words and putting them in the right order, as we saw at the end of our last lecture, a quote from Tom Stoppard, right? They can change the world just a little bit, move it just a little bit, if we can put them in the right order and find the right ones. 
So. We're acknowledging upfront every time we sit down to write that we lack clarity. About what we're trying to say and do. We lack words to articulate that. And our job as writers, which is a hat we need to wear, is to find them. 
So we're going to do something fun for our little warm exercise. I want us today to describe your morning. And We're going to take five minutes for this exercise. The obstacle for you is that you can only use one syllable words. And The goal of this is to force you into more concrete language. This means that you can't say anything too complicated. And it forces you to start finding new ways to describe familiar things. As we've been talking about all quarter, when we reach for sentences and phrases that are familiar, readers often tune out. As soon as they I think they can put you in a box because they understand, they recognize these phrases and signals. They check out of reading and have already categorized and moved on. They've done information triage at that moment. 
So this exercise, focusing on one-syllable words to describe your morning, is ultimately to help you see the thing itself, your morning, the things you did, what you had for breakfast, whatever the parts of your day have been, to see them in a different way. So I'm going to set five, six minutes on the clock here, and then we will kick off. 
All right. One of my favorite things about doing warm-up exercises is that they remind us that writing is a form of play. Just like working in your studio. I think we can get really serious about it too quickly. It's too easy to take ourselves self-seriously in that way. And I love a good warm-up exercise because it reminds me to just play around with language, to find the joy in messing around with it. 
So we're going to-- I'll jump into revision here. You had some homework last time. I don't know how many of you got a chance to step into this. It's certainly something you will need to continue working on as we move through the end of the quarter into the break. And as we prepare for our mentor meetings in the second half. 
So you might remember from last session, your homework was to put what you had just written in a drawer And then next week to pull it out and mark the good bits. Underlying the strong sentences, to circle the strong phrases, and to put boxes around the strong words. We're basically taking the pieces and saying, "Okay, I found new language for how I want to describe my work." And then to copy those bits, the good bits, into a Word document, and rearrange the fragments into paragraphs. Playing with the order. 
And then to write the connective tissue between them. So it's not how we traditionally think about-- about writing. We think of writing, I think in a lot of cases, as something where you start at the beginning and then you write the next sentence and the one after that and then the next paragraph and the paragraph after that and then the page after that and it goes very much in order. And I have found this to be not true, first of all. Many of the writers I talk to, they jump around, right? They write the middle paragraphs first, they write their ending, they come back. 
Sometimes the first paragraph is the last thing they write. They need the thesis to be found through the process of writing, and the first paragraph usually has to articulate the thesis. 
So if you learn what you think by writing, then you probably don't know what your first paragraph is. You jump around in the process. 
So I love this idea of rearranging fragments, writing connective tissue, playing with the order, trying to make sure that readers simply want to read from one sentence to the next, that they have a compelling reason to do so. A comparison, a corollary to this from the recent Brian Eno documentary just called Eno, which is a generative doc made by Gary Hustwit and Brendan Dawes. Gary's a great documentarian who made the movie Helvetica, which I really adore, just about the typeface. And Brendan Dawes is a visual artist often working with technology based in London or near there and working with Gazelli Art House, their incredible gallery based in London. And they made this documentary and in the course of it, Eno talks a lot about creativity. Eno, for those that aren't familiar with him, he was a musician. He produced a lot of famous records, won a lot of Grammy Awards, was really a pioneer in the ambient music space. 
So if you like any of the kinds of things that I've put on during our writing sessions here, This very much comes, right, we are the inheritors. Many of these composers are the inheritors of things that Eno did first. And Eno says in this documentary at one point, I have never seen someone write a song from beginning to end in the way that you would think. And again, just like with writing here, that's not how I thought things worked. I thought, great, you get down the first verse, then you come up with the chorus, then you go back and you write the second verse. It's like it comes in fits and starts, you write these little bits that work, they sit in your pocket, of options for a long time. They get stitched together with parts you write at totally different times in the year. And suddenly this thing melds together. 
So thinking about gathering bits and connective tissue I think is true across many mediums, especially when it comes to writing, but not just words but songs and other things that require longer structure, screenplays, whatever else you can think of here. So that should be freeing. It feels freeing to me because then I don't feel like a failure. Right, I fall into failure mentality when I think I need to start at the beginning. And when I can't get to, you know, the next page, and then the page after that, because it's just not going in order. 
Like it's not working to go in order. I think I'm not cut out to be a writer or to even work in this style. And Turns out that's a lie we've been fed. There are many lies we've been fed, falsehoods. Many of them are not intentional, so we'll call them falsehoods instead. And learning that they're falsehoods, I think, is really liberating. The amazing novelist Vladimir Nabokov said, I have rewritten often several times every word I have ever published. My pencils outlast their erasers. There's this false conception that writers are people who mostly put words down on paper and the truth is True writers are people who edit. They edit rigorously and passionately. They're passionate about the specific words. Seeing just how different a first draft is from a later draft by an accomplished writer is encouraging to me to keep going. To try and, like he says, have your pencils outlast your erasers. Change more than you actually put down. Cheryl Strayed wrote, I write to find out what I have to say. I edit to figure out how to say it right. 
So now that we've gathered all of our materials through our first few weeks of free writing and thinking about the structure and some of these key questions that we can come to in our writing, our job now that we've started to figure out what we have to say about our work, we're learning how to say it right. And that is the real joy of being a writer. 
And then Mark Twain echoed that when he said, "The writing begins when you've finished." Only then do you know what you're trying to say. For me, I've been gathering artist quotes for decades. I have note documents filled with them, copied and pasted from all over, typed in with my two little thumbs as I've read an interview or an essay. I find turning to artists is a really important liberating way to discover that I'm not alone in the world, that I am figuring out how to move through it as an artist myself, and I'm trying to find my companions, my peers through whom we are marching in the same direction together, and that they function like I do, that I'm not a weirdo for not being able to work this one way I heard worked for somebody else. 
So I really value these two quotes because they get at how we're trying to say something and we only know it after we've written and I Again, as Twain said, the writing begins when you've finished. Writing is not putting the words down. Writing is editing and revising and wearing out our erasers. 
So our first revision exercise for today And honestly, this is my favorite revision exercise ever. It's known as hot spotting. It comes from a writing manual from like 20 years ago published at a college West and The idea here is to go through your recent draft and to mark the most meaningful sentences. All right, that was part of your homework. Hopefully you've done that. If not, you'll need to start this exercise by rereading some of what you wrote last time and marking those meaningful sentences. The goal is to find the really essential key ones here. Hotspotting is a chance to take a fresh swing at a good idea you stumbled upon in the course of your free reign. 
So we go through, we mark meaningful sentences that communicate important ideas, and that do it on a poetic yet clear fashion. I would say here is your marking sentences to be stingy. To really find what are the most essential ones here within the work. The next step is to copy and paste one of those meaningful sentences into a new page. To Start fresh. But it's not starting as a blank page. We have one good meaningful sentence on that blank page from which to start. We use it as a jumping off point to write some new text. Use that sentence to write some new text around that idea. And I'll set for us a 15 minute timer for this exercise. Don't worry as you write off of this one meaningful sentence about how this is going to flow with the other text you've written. Often writing the first draft is about getting to the good idea, as I've said again. And the second draft is about figuring out how to say it in the best way possible. Hotspotting helps take those best ideas And now that the idea is here, now that it's crystallized and you've managed to access it, Hotspotting makes space to find new ways of talking about it. As Mark Twain said, this is when the writing begins. 
So a 15 minute timer here. Put on a new piece of music to get us inspired. And we will try to expand on that idea that crystallized first through the free write in your first draft and find the language around that. That works better and says it more clearly than you said when you first came up with the idea. All right. Good luck. I'll see you in a few minutes. 
♪. 
All right. One of the things I love about hotspotting is it really gets at how The writing and the editing are two separate steps in this process of creating whatever piece of writing you're tackling. In this case, it's an artist statement. Later, it might be your bio. Later, it might be a cover letter or a form letter that you use over and over again when you're reaching out to curators. You workshop it again. And finding the language that works takes time. As we've practiced the last two sessions, gathering a lot of material Hotspotting lets us find the gems within that material and then try to expand our ideas around it and learn how to say that idea better. By practicing writing identifying and then writing around that piece. 
So now that you've done the exercise of hotspotting, the next step for us here is to compare the new material to what you'd previously written. Which do you like better? You should feel free to cut large sections of the original text and sub in these new ways of talking about the work. How do these things change? How do these changes make the writing more immersive? 
Something you feel, say, rather than simply think. Or how do they get at the meaning or work more clearly? You do this for a few more key sentences from your draft. If you have one good idea every paragraph or two spread throughout all the writing you've done, well, this is going to give you a lot more to work from as you flesh out these ideas. But it takes having done the free write first, braved the blank page, to get us to those really fundamental key sentences and ideas that we can expand upon. And like I said, sub in some of the new sections you just wrote. And they may not mesh. They, again, may require adjusting the connective tissue here. But the idea is to expand the idea into something more precise and sharp and poignant for the reader. 
So looking at some other quotes from various writers throughout history here to help us think about how to tackle this problem, because we're not reinventing the wheel. I really like this one from William Zinsser. One maxim that my students find helpful is "one thought per sentence." Readers only process one thought at a time, so give them time to digest the first set of facts you want them to know. Then, give them the next piece of information they need to know, which further explains the first fact: be grateful for the period. Writing is so hard that all of us, once launched, tend to ramble. Instead of a period, we use a comma. Followed by a transitional word such as "and" or "while." And soon we have strayed into a wilderness that seems to have no road back out. Let the humble period be your savior. There's no sentence too short to be acceptable in the eyes of God. He hits on a couple of really great ideas in here. One is one thought per sentence. It's easy, I think, when we start reading a lot of art writing that's trying to sound really smart to string together lots of pieces with commas and to try and make sure we, you know, We're expressing big ideas and therefore this needs big sentences as a trap we can fall into. This maximum of one thought per sentence makes it accessible to readers. And again, that's always the goal with our art writing. No matter what kind of art writing it is, it should be accessible to the reader and not push them away. It should invite them in. 
So that's one way of doing it. The other idea I love that he gets at in here is to give them the first set of facts you want them to know Then give them the next piece of information they need to know which further explains the first fact When we're structuring our artist statements, we want to think about what is the first thing that they need to know. What is the most basic essential thing? Which for us starts with what is it? What am I looking at? These are found objects. This is oil on canvas. This is a portrait. Just naming the parts helps anchor people. The worst thing we can do is start from abstraction. 
So think about what is the first thing that they need to know when they look at the piece, and then think about what is the second most important thing. Knowing again as we said last time that there's a good chance lots of readers won't get past the first or second sentence So what is most essential for them to know if they only read a portion a fraction of what you write? When it comes to how to write, grammar is our friend. Jodan Didion said how grammar is a piano I play by ear. All I know about grammar is its power. I think that's I mean, Joan is an incredible and beautiful writer. My wife, Alyssa, wrote a great book on her called We Tell Ourselves Stories. Joan Didion is famous as a style icon and an essayist, but she's perhaps most poignant as a media critic. Which is what Alyssa wrote her book. The paperback for that actually comes out, I think, next week, which I'm very excited about. I line edited that book, like every sentence in it. Printed out, my pen and ink is on those pages. 
So you can even see a photo I took of Alyssa on the back cover. " I think A lot of how we think about words and how to tackle them is in terms of musicality. It is a thing of rhythm. It is a thing of feel. And the way that I learned to write and to edit was by playing it by ear. And I learned that by reading a lot of good writing. I think if I didn't spend my entire 20s reading a New Yorker magazine cover to cover every issue for several years in a row, I would not have the ear I have for grammar today. That's a very particular voice, though. And so what we choose to consume, the type of writing that we choose to read on the regular will influence how our ear thinks good writing sounds. 
So pick your sources well. Go look at more art writing than you have been. Go look at art writing by artists and curators. Think about the difference between those two things. My favorite book on grammar, I'm going to hold up here for you. Is Benjamin Dreyer's book, Dreyer's English, an utterly correct guide to clarity and style. He used to be the copy chief of Random House. He was when this book came out and he was doing the book tour for it. This book blew up. It's very funny. I love it very much. It's, you know, it's decent size. But the truth is, like the first hundred pages are really all the advice on grammar that any human needs. 
And then the rest is sort of more like an encyclopedia you can reference and jump to at various moments. But he writes in a very funny and accessible way, kind of updating what is important here in terms of grammar. 
So when it comes to the rules of grammar, I recommend Benjamin Dreyer's book quite a bit. It's very fun. Everything else, as Didion says, all I know about grammar is its power. The cadence of the thing, the rhythm of it, how it functions. That's all really the parts, the commas and semicolons and the punctuation are doing there. Then we have Virginia Woolf who said, "Style is a very simple matter. It is all rhythm." Once you get that, you can't use the wrong words. Again, two incredible writers saying the same thing in different ways. Style is simply a matter of rhythm. Find a rhythm that you like. That sounds good to your ear. Hopefully you've been reading good writing So your ear is tuned to what that sounds like as opposed to being someone who can only sing off key Because they've never tuned their ear to hear notes well and practice with that But I love that Wolf, again, this is all about freeing us. You can't use the wrong words once you get rhythm down into your writing. They fit in exactly the way that they should because the musicality allows them in the flow. Janet Fitch wrote, "Variety is the key." Most people write the same sentences over and over again, the same number of words, say 8 to 10 or 10 to 12, the same sentence structure. Try to become stretchy. I love that word. Try to become stretchy. If you generally write eight words, throw a 20-word sentence in there. And a few three-word shorties. If you're generally a 20-word writer, make sure you throw in some threes, fivers, and sevens just to keep the reader from going cross-eyed. Variety is the spice of life goes the old adage and that is especially true here in writing. This goes back to style is simply rhythm. And so in the musicality of this, you want passages that are different lengths, both paragraphs that are different lengths, sentences that are different lengths. By changing it up, you create the musicality. You create the long whole notes and the short little 16th note runs and the staccato trills. You create these moments that let the reader play in the language. 
So if you find yourself as Fitch writes, writing similar length sentences and similar structures again and again. Start playing with the way that you vary the rhythm of it. You can do that by the number of words, the word length themselves, And I love just how loose and playful Fitch is with her language when I try to become stretchy, throw in some threes, fivers and sevens. Use a few three-word shorties. 
Like how playful and fun is it to just like read this paragraph by a good writer, right? That's all just word choice, right? I would not have thought in writing, you know, advice about how to write to use the word shorties or fivers. And that's the fun of playing with language and trying to find just the right words. We'll continue thinking about how great writers have taught us, teach us how to write by their own words. Here with this quote from Jay Fitch. Pick a better verb. Most people use 20 verbs to describe everything. From a run in their stocking to the explosion of an atomic bomb. And as Mary Oliver wrote, look for verbs of muscle Adjectives of exactitude. It's really true. You've been listening to me talk for two quarters now. We're about to wrap up our second quarter. And for this batch of cohorts. And you've started to hear my ticks. You hear the little things that I say over and over again. I fall into these ruts. What is the word I use to describe when I fall into them? It's ruts. It's the words that are right there close at hand that I pull out of the ether because they're close at hand. They're handy. I appreciate these words. But... I get repetitive. And I know that. And you're starting to learn it too. You do it too. Most people, as J. Fitch wrote, use 20 verbs to describe everything. It doesn't matter how small that thing is or big that thing is. I use the word great a lot because I do think lots of things are great. Could I use the word good more? But when I sit down to write, we need to work at picking better verbs of muscle, adjectives of exactitude that really articulate succinctly what this thing is and avoid repetition, that avoid falling into ruts. And there I need to practice my own language and ways of thinking and talking about this stuff. That's what's fun about the revision process. We start to look for our own little ticks, the things that get us caught up in Repetition. And we find new ways of saying it that are evocative that pull the reader into the work not just intellectually but emotionally. 
So let's turn to a few editing hacks. This is not a comprehensive list whatsoever. It's even a bit of a jumble, I would say. But these are things that I have found over the years work incredibly well when it comes to editing our work. The first is to read your piece aloud after you've finished writing it. Or better yet, after you put it in a drawer and come back to it in a week. Or if you don't feel comfortable reading it aloud, drop the text into a voice reading accessibility app. I use one called Natural Reader. I drop a lot of articles, especially from JSTOR in there and just hit play. I have some decent AI voices that will read me the text in a kind of natural sounding way. I finished many articles and books that way. 
So you can have it read it to you instead if you don't want to read it aloud. Though I do love reading aloud. 
Sometime, like two, three years ago, I was doing an exhibition. I decided to make a trailer, a video trailer for the show. And so I recorded myself reading my curatorial statement aloud. This was after I'd already published it, which was a mistake. I discovered when I got to the last paragraph of the text that I could not say the sentence I'd written aloud. It made no sense in the moment that I was saying it. And if I had done practice to what I preach and read the piece aloud before clicking publish, I would have discovered that I needed to edit that sentence. And I did. I revised the sentence for the video trailer version and then went back and slyly snuck in the revision. Into the printed version as well. Reading it aloud clarifies so much. It's an incredible way for revising your work. Not only for making sure there are no errors, but realizing how you would say it aloud. Even if no one is going to ever speak your piece of writing aloud, You want to write for the ear and not for the eye because that's how our brains converted anyway. The second piece of advice is to change the font and reread it. This one-- I learned from several good writers, including my wife. The written page can be like a familiar landscape. We have gone over the terrain several times. The words are laid out in the same place on the page, and so we come to them and the line breaks when we wrap around to start the next line in the same point in the sentence again. And by walking those same pathways through the woods again and again, we get lost. We can't see the wood for the trees. Or vice versa. Now I can't remember how that phrase is said. Changing the font and sometimes the size of it too that visual shift can dislocate you. And help you see it in a new way. The words aren't in the same places anymore. And so the terrain has changed, and it can feel like it's the writing of someone else now, in many cases. I've heard that from several writers who are like, I reread it, I write in whatever it is, Times New Roman, Arial, and then I change it into Courier or Georgia, often switching from a serif to a sans serif or vice versa. It's really effective. And suddenly it feels like someone else wrote it. And so you can look at it with fresh eyes in that moment. It is such a small, tiny thing, and I have found it to be so effective. 
Honestly, one of my favorite editing hacks. The next is to print out your draft and edit it by hand. Right. All of these are ways of trying to help us dislocate ourselves from the familiar. If you've done any real revision work, and again, writing is revision, right? Writing isn't just getting the words down on the page. Writing is getting into the weeds of the text and playing with language and rhythm and the musicality of it and finding the right word that evokes the right thing. It gets familiar the more we've walked that terrain. 
So printing out your draft is another way of seeing it differently. You can even combine these. You can change the typeface. Print it out. Edit it by hand, going through that. With a pen instead. I find that really effective. 
And then when you're done editing, print it out again in a new typeface and then read it aloud. Mixing and matching between these three is a really effective way to make the familiar feel new. The next is to change where the piece starts. Are you starting your artist statement at the right moment? Often when we're drafting a new piece of writing, the first paragraph or two is just preamble. Maybe you picked this up in middle school or high school writing classes. But it takes us a while to get into our ideas. And so if we're early in the editing process, those first two paragraphs may just be the preamble that is unnecessary to the ideas in the piece, like to getting them across clearly. And it's the greatest risk moment when we could potentially lose our readers. We need to get to the meat of what we want to say faster. Or truthfully start saying anything meaningful sooner. 
So as you're editing, try cutting your opening. To get to the point faster. The sooner you say something substantial, the more likely you are to keep your reader engaged. Another approach is to change change the words. Here, right, the cut all the abstractions from the first paragraph. Once you find what your first paragraph is, again, we want to anchor people in what the work is, And looks like... And that means often hunting for any of the abstractions, any of the language that is obtuse or pushing people away and instead get as concrete and specific as possible. Another is to anticipate misunderstandings. You've shown and talked about this work before, I would hope. You're doing it in your cohorts. Hopefully you have some friends or colleagues in your life who are able to show your work too. You've heard the misunderstandings that happen when people look at your work and try to interpret it. 
So sit down and list all of the ways your work has been misunderstood in the past. Which of those misinterpretations or misunderstandings could happen again with this particular work now? 
And then ask yourself, what could you say in your artist statement to help avoid that happening again this time? You can head off some of those misunderstandings or misinterpretations by how you describe the work here and now. 
So anticipate those and help that influence the language that you use. We're not trying to be defensive when we say that. We're simply trying to be clear and helpful to the viewer. 
So if we know that if I say this, they might think that, and I don't want them to think that, when we change the way we say the thing. Another is to change words for their connotation. So a good example of this is odor. Versus aroma. Right. The connotations of words, not just what they represent and mean inherently, do a lot of work, right? Odor and aroma are both words that refer to our sense of smell. But one can be a pleasing aroma. But I don't think of the odor of an apple pie wafting off the windowsill, right? Odor is a word I apply to gym socks and how I smell after a run. It is a completely different connotation even though both words are essentially the same. There is a different inherent thing that we're taking away from this that it evokes for the reader. 
So playing with connotation can be really powerful Saying bad smell is nowhere near as punchy as bad odor. So with that in mind, I would read through your writing and circle five words where you can rely on connotation to make a stronger word choice. Another is to identify the words and phrases you intend to make people feel the work. Reading is not just an intellectual experience. I think it's really easy when we get into art writing to think about We are simply there to explain the work. We're there to... Unpack its meaning, tell you what it is and why it's important, Great. Thank you for being here. Now go look at my art. Right, no, this can be an engaging experience and an emotional one as well. 
So you don't only want to tell people about your work, You want to help them feel it. So look through your artist statement and identify words and phrases that can help people feel the work. Choose evocative words, right? Muscular verbs, right? Evocative adjectives. The last thing is, Always have an editor. It's difficult to see our own writing clearly. And So it is a good idea to trade services with a writer friend you trust, or to pay a copy editor for 30 minutes of work. Or to hop on Fiverr. It's especially important if your first language isn't English. These days we have ChatGPT and other AI models that we can drop our writing into and ask it to clean it up. But the truth is, "Patchy BT has its own tics." FOD has its own ticks. They have ways of structuring sentences and paragraphs that are so repetitive that I think all of us, if you haven't yet, you will soon, have been picking up on how those ticks function. We're starting to read social media posts and newsletters and marketing emails that sound like ChatGPT, It's a writer with its own style and taste. I sometimes ask it to help me come up with better hooks for marketing social media posts that I'm writing. And at some point it became less useful than it was when I first started because I realized how repetitive it was sounding. It always wanted to open with a question, something that would incite curiosity. And that's effective. But I started to realize I could hear the voice of it more clearly. 
So there is still a real power to human editors, right? We trust things that come from humans in a different way. There are a lot of artists who get very mad about any use of AI. And if you are trying to appeal to other artists and curators and gallerists and people from the art world, know that if they can smell the scent or perhaps the odor of AI in your writing, that could very potentially turn them off to what you're doing. But the power here in using an editor is again to get out of your own head. To have somebody help you see what your work is doing more clearly. That'll help with catching the grammar mistakes and the punctuation mistakes. But there are questions here about clarity. And style and rhythm that an editor can be really helpful for. 
So again, that can be someone that you find through Fiverr, someone you hire to do 30 minutes of work, somebody that you trust in their writing and you trade services with. There are so many ways to get a second set of eyes on your writing and get that support. One of my favorites for doing that is to find a writing partner. And our last couple exercises for today are going to focus on that. If they have a friend, look at the piece. You don't explain it. Then you have them simply ask you questions about it. So in essence, And I would encourage you to reach out to other artists in this community who you've connected with over time, see if you want to trade Writing help with one another form little writing groups among yourselves. We're reaching that point in the program where I'm going to start encouraging us to do more things collaboratively as a group. And to form small additional pods and work groups. 
So think about who within our community has resonated with you, whose work you've connected with, who you vibed with well during your cohort session or a reading group discussion. That could be a great person to reach out to. You can do this in groups of twos or threes. But you want it to be intimate and you want to have people who know your work well. 
So. One of the first exercises to do here is to sit down with your writing partner for coffee make it a casual situation, and record yourself explaining the piece or series to them. 
So the record is the operative verb here, not the explaining. This is a way, again, it's a different way of trying to get at our first draft than the ones we've been doing with free writing. If you find that writing with words is difficult to put on page, then to put on the page then you can Do this verbally. Record yourself explaining the piece or series to them. Or have them look at the piece and ask you questions about it so they become like an interviewer asking you about the piece and what they see in the work. 
And then you can transcribe and edit the recording to form the backbone of your first draft. So this is a good exercise for working with a writing partner going through the interview steps or just explaining it and recording it. And that transcription can, again, be your free write. It can get you to your early first draft. Work through the bad sentences. As you're explaining the piece, As you're explaining the work, try to keep them engaged. That's really important. I find that doing this verbally is a really good test, right? Because you can see when someone's attention starts to wane. You're practicing essentially good cocktail party etiquette. You don't want to be the guy in the corner who corners someone for 30 minutes talking about something that the other person isn't interested in. You want to practice. Watching them and how engaged they are in what you're saying and modifying what you're saying and how you're saying it to re-engage them if they start to lose attention on what you're saying. 
So that can be a really good way to get away from simply having to free write as we have the last two weeks. Once you have the first draft, which you can get through free writing as we've done, or through this kind of explain it to a friend, record it and transcribe it method, The other great thing to do with a writing partner is revision. 
So once you've finished your second or third draft, swap artist statements and revise your partner's writing while they revise yours. I'm going to stay on this point for just a second longer. Editing someone else's writing is an incredible shortcut to improving your own writing. You'll immediately notice things they're doing that you might want to do yourself. Things that were effective. Whether that was evoking emotions and you've realized I don't do enough. Evoking through my writing and helping people feel the work when they read about it. I'm doing this too intellectually, but I really love when my writing partner does X, Y, and Z. That's one example of the many things you might see as you read their work, and then you might want to emulate and figure out how to implement in your own writing. When you are editing someone else's work, you're more objective. Maybe you've heard them describe something that didn't make its way into the current version of the text that they gave you for their artist statement. But you think that thing that they had once told you is actually the essential thing to understanding or unpacking the work. You have this outside perspective. And that's really what an editor is there to do and a writing partner can take that role It's to help us see the things that we have lost track of and so By having a writing partner who knows your work that you continue to come back to over time, they might call out those things that, I've heard you say this about your work. I thought that was really effective. Why don't you put that in here? That can be really clarifying. And as you give them advice on how to revise, remember, to take that advice for yourself. I have learned through my years of teaching how many things I think I know And don't put into practice. 
And then I sit down In a cohort session, I offer feedback during a studio visit. And suddenly I remember, I see them doing this in their work. I should bring that into my own practice. 
Well, the same thing happens here with revising artist statements. As you're giving the advice, you can start to see places where you should be taking that advice. You're like, I don't love when they do this. I do that. I should start to incorporate that into my process as well. The last one here is called the Red Star Revision Exercise. And this actually gets at some of that cocktail party attention stuff we were just talking about. 
So the idea is to make a printout of your artist statement. And each time you feel your attention drifting, Mark that point in the text with a red star. The idea here is that within the Red Star exercise, you are just riding the wave of the peace. And this can be really good when they've gotten far into the drafting process, not early on, because you might have a lot of red stars in that situation. But your goal here is to simply say, did I want to keep reading to the next sentence? When did you lose me? What sentences did I find confusing? What sentences caused me to start thinking about the lunch that I need to fix in half an hour. It's a really good way to just flag what is and isn't working on a really basic but most essential level. In the end, Writing teaches writing. John McPhee, one of our great writing instructors who I used to teach at Princeton, if I'm remembering correctly. The same goes for editing teaches, you know, editing and writing. Engaging with words more frequently is the thing that will get us to being not more comfortable, but it is the thing that gets us to do it better. I heard the joke once that what is a writer except someone who for whom writing is more difficult than for the rest of us. The more we care about words, sometimes the harder it gets. 
So there's a happy middle ground here where we don't have to go to that extreme. But we do have to do the thing to learn to do the thing. It reminds me of when I was taking acting classes when I first moved to New York. I didn't want to be an actor, I wanted to be a director and I wanted to understand how actors function because it's such an important part of directing actors. Of directing any movie is directing actors and The truth is they can't teach you acting. They really can't. There are some basic ideas there, but mostly it's about making space and giving accountability that you do the thing. Acting teaches acting, just doing the thing. Writing teaches writing. Making art in your studio teaches you making art in your studio. You just have to go do the thing. And the good news is if you can gather the right people around yourself, it can give you the motivation to keep going when it is hard. And so Writing partners are a great way to help us keep going and practice and stretch the other parts of our skills. Editing teaches us about writing too. I want to close here with a reading list of additional recommended books here. 
So we have Art Right by Vicky Krohn-Amaros. I pulled up this book a couple weeks ago and mentioned it. It's very short. It is full of good writing prompt exercises in there. For helping you when you get stuck. A lot of the ideas that we talked about in the last three sessions will be really helpful there. The second book here, is How to Write About Contemporary Art by Gilda Williams. It's known as the Little Red Book. This one is, it is beautifully designed I find that the colors and the layouts and It's just very easy to process. One of the things that's true about this book is that it's mostly, I find, geared toward curators. And art world professionals, people working in museums, at auction houses, art advisors, people evaluating the condition of her work. That book is great because it is trying to help people who need to do a lot of writing for their work, learn how to do it better. And it is full of really good examples of other artist statements, any of these sections in white paper. Box text are really-- it's a piece of-- She's pulled a lot of samples of art writing, good and bad, all in there side by side. It's a little drier and a little denser than the other one but equally good for We already mentioned Dreyer's English: An Utterly Correct Guide to Clarity and Style by Ben Dreyer. That's another great one. This is a little off the beaten path. It's not specifically about art writing, but I found The Craft of Research, which is now already in its fifth edition. Incredibly good book. This really-- Honestly, I think I graduated high school without fully understanding what a thesis was. I think I had some really bad writing teachers, which is really surprising because I really loved my English classes when I was growing up. But for whatever reason, this book finally cracked it wide open for me and got me thinking about how to incorporate a thesis, which is just a claim about the work that you back up. I make claims about the world all day, every day, and then I back them up with some facts. We do the same when we do visual analysis. Of an artwork, right? We observe it, we gather some facts, and then we start to make meaning of it. We're making a claim about the work that we back up with the facts that we gathered. I found the craft of research really good as a text for helping me think about that. The last couple examples here The Artist as Critic by Oscar Wilde is just a wonderful book. Very short and accessible piece for thinking about the relationship between artist and critic which gets us thinking about Again, what makes good art writing and good art in general? And the last is C.S. Lewis's An Experiment in Criticism. 
So many people know Lewis for his very parable-forward books like The Lion, the Witch, and the Wardrobe, his Tales of Narnia, which Greta Gerwig, who directed the Barbie movie, is making as her next project. So I'm very excited about that. But Lewis is an incredible nonfiction writer, and his piece, An Experiment in Criticism, Is honestly one of the best things you'll ever read about criticism. It's so smart and articulate. We close today with one more quote, this one from Sophie Burnham. There are so many different ways There are so many different kinds of writing and so many ways to work if the only rule is this: Do what works. Almost everything has been tried and found to succeed for somebody. The methods, even the ideas of successful writers contradict each other in a most heartening way. And the only element I find common to all successful writers is persistence. An overwhelming determination to succeed. 
So I've tried over these three sessions to give you a sense of what has worked for me And what I have found has worked well for the artists that I have mentored over the years at colleges and through studio visits and under the umbrella of exhibitions that I've put together, in which I need artist statements from lots of them. The truth is the only thing that ties all the different ways of approaching writing together is truly that persistence and overwhelming determination to succeed. Pick the advice that works for you. Pick the methods that work for you. Find a few bedfellows who believe the same things and function the same way as artists and as writers. They tell us that we are not alone in the world, that in fact we are onto something and if we just keep going, we, like them too, might succeed someday. Find what works for you. That's the only rule from all of this. And persist. Persist through getting through the blank page, free write badly. The only sin here is to not begin. And When we get to the other side of that, we have some ideas that we can then, that we started to crystallize. We can use hotspotting as a way to take those really good ideas that are perhaps not as well or clearly written as we might want and start to expand them into better sentences and better paragraphs and then incorporate those back into the original. 
And then find a writing partner. Find an editor, find partners who can help you refine what you wrote. Bring them at a stage where you're proud of what you've written or proud enough It doesn't have to be perfect. It just needs to have been written. You're still at the editing stage when you bring them in. 
So don't get in your head too much about it. I know I certainly do, but Find people that you trust enough to show them when it's 60, 70% of the way there, but you know it still needs more. And return the favor. Do that for them as well. 
So I would encourage you to reach out to one another in the next couple weeks. Form into groups of twos and threes. Trade favors here of reading each other's writing, doing a red star exercise marking when you get distracted, reminding people of ideas that you've heard them say about their art to incorporate into it. There are so many ways to tackle the problem, and that's the good part. We gather these resources and you just pick what works and keep going. Don't give up. 
So thanks for tuning in for our third section on how to write about art this quarter. I'm excited to review, as I said at the beginning, your artist statements when we get to our mentor meetings. Next quarter. And so definitely be working on them. This is your homework for over the break. And I'll see you guys soon. Have a great weekend.
