Haiver | 00:00
Hi art friends. Today we're joined by Dr. Elliot Krasnopouler, Elliot received his PhD from Bryn Mawr College with a really pleasurable dissertation called "What the Earth Remembers: Landscape and Materiality in Contemporary Art." I really enjoyed listening to that when I found a recording of it online and the works that it dug into because it examines how artists' material engagement with land and place honors new understandings of American history. His scholarship across the board is grounded in close attention to works of art, but drawing on history, ecology, post-human studies, and the environmental humanities. With such an incredible broad range of interests and skills, which he acquired from a BFA from Rochester Institute of Technology and Photography, as well as an MA in the history of art from Williams College, I'm really excited for Dr. Krasnopoulos to talk with us today about the history of photography and epistemology. And don't worry, he's going to define that word for those of us that are less familiar with some of the philosophical terms that get kicked around. But I'm excited to have him talk about photography and its history at this particular moment in time when we have AI image generators starting to raise questions around the truthfulness and facticity of photography. Photographic looking images. And those debates have been had in the history of photography much earlier and for a much longer span of time. So we don't have to reinvent the wheel here when trying to think through our relationship to the image. Elliott edited the volume Breaking the Silence: Methods of Writing Art History. And he was the 2021-2022 George Gurney Postdoctoral Fellow at the Smithsonian American Art Museum. So I am delighted to introduce you all to Dr. Krasnopoulos.
Elliot Krasnopoler | 02:06
Hi, everyone. It's so nice to Be here and be lecturing. I'm really excited to give this lecture and thank you so much haver for permitting me my jargony title and I can't wait to dive into it. Would you Is the title slide up? Great. Okay. Good morning. Well, it's my morning because I live in Hawaii, but good day to everyone. And so today I'm going to be talking about the epistemology of photography. And so first, What is epistemology? Fair question. It is one of my favorite words. And so that's why I included it in here. But epistemology is the branch of this philosophy that examines the nature, origin and limits of knowledge. In other words, it's asking us How do we know? How do we make meaning? How does meaning change and shift over time and really what is knowledge so the epistemology of photography is pretty much asking, How do photographs work to give us information, work as evidence, and how has that changed over the history of photography? ועשיתי את המסגרת שלהם chronologically. So we're going to start in the very beginning and we're going to move forward. It's not a comprehensive history of photography, but it is a little history of photography with an eye towards how has photography's meaning and sense changed since its founding in 1839. So with that. I'll dive in. And I want to first give a sort of quick overview of what we're going to be talking about today, and then we'll go through each of the sections. So I've structured it over five sections. In the first section, we're going to start with the earliest promises of photography, thinking about Fox Talbot and some of the first photos ever taken. Then we're going to move into photography beyond human sight and think about the history of science and its intersections with photography. Next, we're going to move to images as instruments of the state. And this is a section that's a little bit trickier and really thinks about the relationship between photography, knowledge, and control and its use in criminality. After that, we're going to move to documentary and manipulation. So now we're in the 1920s, 1930s and thinking about the instantiation and the rise of documentary photography. And last, we're going to jump forward all the way to the present, almost 100 years, and ask, what does it mean now that we have generative images and AI? And that's going to be a section that's sort of filled with questions because we don't have answers yet for some of those. But with that, Let's get started. Section one, the earliest promises of photography. So this is a picture by William Henry Fox Talbot He is one of the sort of few people that originated photography. And this is a picture he took of Lecoq Abbey, which was his home at the time. And Fox Talbot was a gentleman scientist and a sort of rich man in Britain. And photography was officially... Invented in 1839 with the publication by Daguerre. But he's taking this picture sometime a little bit before that as a practice or as he's studying it. והמקום שלהם שאני מיוחד עליו פה, זה כי אני באמת רוצה להתמודד את המסגן של מה שעובד עכשיו, נכון? לא היו מוצאים את ספציה, אנחנו במידה של המעטת ה-19, המדעה מאוד מוצאה, ואת המדיאם הנהיון, is coming is basically coming up and people are really excited about it and they don't quite know what to do with it. And Talbot has a great quote about this particular image where he writes, this building, I believe to be the first that was ever yet known to have drawn its own picture. And I really want to sort of emphasize that notion of drawn its own picture. He uses the word drawn by light over and over again. This is a really different way of understanding how images can emerge. But what I really want to talk about, what we're going to spend most of our time on, Fox Talbot today, is the book that he published a few years later called The Pencil of Nature. And this is a great and wonderfully worn copy from the Getty that I love. And So photography is invented in '39. And Fox Talbot publishes this multi-volume book with plates and writing that is trying to work out for himself What is this new medium? How does it work? What might it be used for? And it's essentially like a sales pitch to the world of what photography is. It is and how it's used for. The book itself didn't sell that well and photography, as we all know, took off nonetheless. But his writing is really illustrative of sort of where people, where his mind and what people were thinking about the medium at its earliest instantiation. So what I'm going to do is show a couple of different slides of from the book and then read some of Talbot's writing. And we're going to kind of talk through What did this medium, what did photography mean at its earliest moment? And how are people already understanding it in a really prescient way? The first image is plate three, which is a picture of a bookcase filled with white china of all different shapes and sizes. It is remarkably detailed, and then it includes a whole bunch of different things. And here's what Talbot writes about it. The whole cabinet of a virtuoso and collector of old China might be depicted on paper in little more time than it would take him to make a written inventory describing it in the usual way. And so already he's noting photography is quicker than drawing or describing. And it is a time-saving medium. The more strange and fantastic the forms, like the ones he's depicted here, of his old teapots. The more advantage in having their pictures given instead of these descriptions. And he continues, should a thief afterwards purloin the treasures If the mute testimony of the picture were to be produced against him in court, it would certainly be evidence of a novel kind. I love this. But what the judge and jury might say to it is a matter which I will leave to the speculation of those who possess the legal acumen. And I love this evidence of a novel kind. He already understands something so fundamental that a picture is relating to the world in a new way. A way that people hadn't experienced before. And what will we do with it in the court of law and in the world of evidence? And he sort of understands right away that there is this relationship between photography and the world that's different. And this comes to structure so much about photography, but I just really like that Talbot has understood this from its very instantiation. Bye. And then the next slide, the next plate I want to introduce is plate 13 from Queens College in Oxford. Here we can see an old building, a couple of towers, a bunch of windows. And here's what Talbot says about it. Quote, "The operator himself discovers on examination perhaps long afterwards, that he has depicted many things that he had no notion of at the time. Sometimes, inscriptions and dates are found upon the buildings, or printed placards most irrelevant. Are discovered upon their walls. Sometimes a distant dial plate, a clock. Is seen and upon it unconsciously recorded the hour of the day at which the view was taken. So here is that distant dial plate reading the time of 3.40 in the afternoon, I think. Maybe 240 and I just love this because he's The other thing he's really understanding here is that The image the camera produces, the image that photography generates doesn't need to be intended by the maker, which is such a major shift from the world of print painting, drawing, where every mark was made by a human hand. And here it's drawn by the building itself. It's drawn by light. And so Photos can include details and information that the maker didn't intend or even notice. And this really shifts the way that we think about images as well, because all of a sudden they aren't totally tied to the human person. And they're now like relating to the world and it changes our understanding of agency and mark making and authorship. And it's sort of, runs with that and continues to change for the rest of the history of photography. But I'm so interested in the fact that right at the very beginning, he's already understanding this. So really what we're talking about here a bit is this notion of the index, this term from semiotics. The index is the idea that something in the world relates directly to its image. So a footprint in the sand is kind of a classic example, but all photographs are indexes. And an artist, a contemporary artist who is using this notion of photography really wonderfully and really humorously to me is Victor Bergen's work, Photopath, from 1967. And for this work, it's actually conceptual work, kind of like a soliloquy wall drawing. And He gives instructions, and the instructions are to take 21 pictures of the floor, print them at the exact same size of the floor, and then affix them to the floor of the gallery where they were. And so here, this is an installation from 1984, so we know that these are all probably gelatin silver prints. And what he's doing is he's using this version of photography, this notion that it is indexable, that it relates to the world, that it contains things beyond what we intend, and he's flattening it. Quite literally onto the floor to be the most basic version and the most simple, And he's sort of elevating almost humorously this promise of photography. And I really like that. And I think it's such a great relationship between the 1840s and the 1960s here. And so here is the other side of the work of art, the instructions, a path along the floor, photographs printed to actual size, images are perfectly congruent with their objects. And we can see here a very modern from 2023 version with color photos and just how well these images just remarkably just blend with the floor. And I think it's such a good work of art. So that's what I have for Talbot. Let's talk about key points before we move on to the next section. So at the very beginning of photography, it is drawn by light rather than human touch, a revolution. It captures beyond the maker's intention. It is a new kind of evidence. And last, photographs are indexical and iconic. And what this means is that they are indexical, they really relate to the world, but they're iconic in the sense that they look like the world. So these are terms from semiotics that some of you may or may not be familiar with, but These terms post-date what Talbot is doing and writing about them. But photography becomes a really important medium for people's understanding of how Mark making and meaning making is generated because of some of its trickiness around indexicality, ikinesciny. And symbology, which we're not going to talk about today, but might come up later. Okay, so now on to next section two. Photography Beyond Human Sight. So this section, I'm really diving into some of the scientific promises of photography. And the first image I've brought up is Henry Fox Talbot's photo micrograph of a plant stem. And we're returning right back to Talbot here because he was a scientist and there was this understanding that photography would be used for science from the get-go, from the very earliest instances. And because it was invented by chemists and opticians and people that were using scientific methods, Right away, People understood that photography would be part of the history of science. And what it did was it allowed you to reproduce an image that you couldn't see with your naked eye. And so photomicrographs are a really good example of that. And it's shifting by allowing these pictures to be published and passed around what we think of as human sight and visuality. And just to give a sense of how complicated a photo micrograph system would have been in the 1800s, you need a really long photo look. Focal length in order to take a picture of something really small. And so they were designing these big arduous setups in order to take these tiny little pictures. But if this is the 1840s, just 20 years later in the 1860s, they've really already perfected the sensitivity of the chemicals, The optics and science is moving so fast that now we're getting really excellent images that look almost like they're modern, but they're 150, 160 years old. And this is Arthur Durham's photo micrograph of a flea. And so people are getting to see things that they otherwise wouldn't be able to see. And then I've included one more slide of a photo micrographer who is just a guilty pleasure of mine. And that's Wilson Bentley's snowflakes. And so Bentley is a self-taught photographer. Who asked for a camera as a teenager because he wanted to photograph snowflakes. And he took over 5,000 images of these. And... I both really love these images and think that they're really beautiful. His photographs of snowflakes are the reason that we think snowflakes are unique and not all the same because before that wasn't an assumption that people make. But they sit at the uneasy relationship between museum art and photo micrography you'll see his works in art museums a lot and in art collections because he took so many pictures there's a lot of them around and they're just so beautiful and I just Always. Welcome an opportunity to introduce him. At the same time that people are taking pictures of really small things, they're taking pictures of really far away things. And right away, photographers here, John Adams Whipple, attach cameras to telescopes and try to take pictures of the moon and the stars. Of course, this immediately presented a problem because the sky is really dark and early photography required a lot of light. You and So the question is, how do you photograph something that's actively moving? The earth is rotating, the moon is orbiting the earth, and you need a fast shutter speed. Relatively fast for the 1850s in order to capture it. And so what Whipple did in his observatory was he built a machine that rotated the telescope at the same rate as the Earth so that he could get this clear image, a daguerreotype of Earth. Of the moon. And it's just so beautiful and so remarkable that 10 years after the invention of this medium, people are already taking pictures of the moon in a way that no one would have really ever been able to see without a telescope. You can imagine people with telescopes at this time were rare because optics were super expensive. And I want to show just one quick detail of this just to see how beautiful the plate is. So you can see that the moon, despite Whipple's efforts, is relatively blurry. But then you see all of the chemistry and the scratches on the plate. And it's really cool. Quickly, moon photography improved. This is 20 years later, and Henry Draper's 10-second exposure gives us an image of the moon that looks a lot like images of the moon that you might find online today. But this one still isn't quite super sharp the way that we might see in a modern photo. And you can see that if you zoom in as well. Because here you can see the scratches on the plate and the dust. This is probably a wet collodion plate that's been exposed wet and then processed wet. And then the moon is just a little bit soft all around. And I think this is really beautiful. So 检 查 物 理 、 摄 像 、 And immediately it's expanding what people think of what they can see and what vision looks like. Conflating like, okay, well, if the camera's like a human eye, but the camera can see beyond the human eye, what is this new medium? And how are we changing our understanding of what it means to gain information by what we see? And disseminate that information through prints at first that are based on the photos and then through actual photos that are printed and disseminated. And contemporary artists have taken up some of this history. And I'm going to include just a couple of examples here of a couple of contemporary artists that are turning to astrological photography in their own work. And they are not making beautiful images, but they are actually thinking a little bit conceptually. So the first artist I want to introduce is Trevor Paglen. And he did a project where he took beautiful photos of the sky. But in each of those photos, he includes a satellite or some unknown object. And so here you can see that unknown object is this streak that does not match the rest of the sky. And Paiklin is... Working to surface like global systems and state, systems and military industrial systems. Through pictures that are otherwise Not quotidian, but they might not look like they are surfacing those kinds of histories. And so his other image is sort of illustrative of this where he's, face the camera directly up and taking a picture of as the earth rotates. But then here you can see his three unidentified spacecrafts, one, Two. All at the edges of the frame. And Pagelin, you can imagine, can't really control for this, but he is selecting the images that include these things. But this is part of that history of astrological photography, of turning the camera skywards to try to see what we can know. And he's not trying to learn things about the cosmos, but he's actually saying something about our relationship to the cosmos and the relationship between human space. And then the last artist I want to bring in is Liz Deschens. And for these Five. Plates. She sensitizes them with photochemistry. So they're tin types, I think. And Then she places them out in the world with no lens and no camera, and they just absorb the moon's rays and the stars' rays overnight. And then she processes them. And there's just subtle variations. So these are kind of almost not even photographs, but they're such a great counterpoint to those early instantiate, those early efforts to try to get such a sharp image of the sky. And here, She is ignoring that and just interested in the notion and the capturing of the light of the sky at all. And these are sort of portraits of place and they are building on abstraction. And they're so different than Pagelin's images that are so sharp and using the newest technology in order to say something about technology. Liz here is really saying something about photography. And so That's photographs of visible things. There's a whole nother side of scientific photography that emerges that I want to introduce here. And that's photographing things that we couldn't see at all. So when you're photographing a micrograph or a star or a moon, you could see those things with optical Help. But then in the 1880s, people start photographing things that you can't see at all. And so let me show you the first example. So this is Etienne Jules Moret's man walking. And I've included this image because it really shows what's going on. This is the more famous image by Marais. Which is very abstract. But let's start with this one and really talk through it. So he invented chronophotography, capturing of multiple separate and sequential movements of an object across the frame through multiple exposures in order to track how that movement operates. And so here you can really see each of the frames. You can see the man's head. His arms, his legs, you can see his feet that are blurry. And what he's done is he's put the man in a suit. Painted white lines on him so that what you end up seeing is really just a tracking of his movement. And Murray is really interested in trying to make a soldier and this is a soldier walking at a military base facility in France, he's trying to figure out whether or not he can make the soldiers movements more efficient for training. So there is a real sort of relationship to the military industrial complex here, which we're going to talk a bit more in a second. But Art historians and photo history loves these images because they are really unique and really beautiful and a version or a visual of movement that is completely different than what our eye sees. In the end. Marais' images did not have a lot of usefulness for science, but they did have a lasting impact in art and in cinema. And we can see that especially in Marcel Duchamp's nude Descending a Staircase, which looks so similar to Marais' multiple exposures. At almost the same time that Murray is trying to capture motion, Edward Muybridge is trying to capture motion, but with a technique that we still see today, which is fast shutter speeds in order to freeze motion. And so what's going on with Muybridge at this moment is he's actually working for Leland Stanford. You can see that right here as Stanford of Stanford University. And there was a debate happening at the time about whether or not horses' legs all left the ground. And in paintings, they expected them to all leave the ground, but in a very specific way. And Stanford, who was a horse owner, thought that maybe this wasn't the case and hired Muybridge to invent a technique in order to capture how a horse's legs really operated at a full gallop, which people genuinely couldn't figure out because the eye sees at 24 frames per second. And these pictures are at about one thousandth of a second. So, Muybridge does capture it. You can see it in the second and third frame here that the horse's legs do fully leave the ground. And this was actually kind of revolutionary it was published in a bunch of articles it changed paint equestrian painting painters started painting horses more realistically but it caused a real ruckus rodan the sculptor There was a debate about whether this was real, like, are the paintings real? Or is the photo real? Which one is the true thing? And Rodin wrote a great quote, which I want to read that kind of gets at this a little. He writes, it is the artist who is truthful, and it is the photograph, as in Muybridge's photograph, that lies. For in reality, time does not stop. So Rodan is kind of pointing out here Well, if I can't see the horse's legs leave the ground, my imagination of them is more real than what the photograph has. So there's a friction going on already right now where they are sort of trying to figure out what is real and what is the new information and how do we slot this new information from photography into our existing knowledge systems? And in the end, Muybridge won out and Stop motion photography and fast photography is super common now. You can see it in replays on sports networks and all sorts of places. But at the time, there was some anxiety about this. We'll actually talk a bit more about that anxiety in a second. But first, I want to show one more image. And the last image I have for the history of photography and its relationship to science and invisibility is the invention of x-rays in 1886. So. Whereas the other two are really using photography to capture motion or capture something that a human eye can't see. Here, we're capturing light rays that the human eye can't see in a way that really surprises people. And this is actually Ronchin's wife. That's her hand that he's photographed. And when she sees this, she explains, quote, "I have seen my death." And this caused a big change in what we understand because now all of a sudden You have this medium that's not just our eye. It's not just our eye with optics letting us see things that are far or close. It's now able to see through objects. It's now able to produce knowledge and see things that we couldn't have even imagined or didn't really have images of. And So quickly, you know 1886 it's only been around for 45 years Photography is totally changing our relationship to images and what images can show us about the world. And the other thing that's happening here is that there's an anxiety about photography and art. And here, we're going to get to that in the key points. But first, I want to show Robert Rauschenberg's booster, which is just such a great lithograph of an x-ray as a work of art. And this is actually Rauschenberg himself as an x-ray that he printed in a gigantic lithograph that you can learn. That you can look up that's really cool. But I don't have much else to say about it. So let's go on to key points. Key points on this section. Cameras enabled observations and circulation of images that we could not otherwise see. And as photography pushed beyond the visible, it changed how we see and imagine the world. So, At first, photography changes what we mean images to be, but now it's actually changing what we imagine the world to be. It's changing how we can sort of think about things. And then in addition, from a very early point, photographs and knowledge generation were linked. And this becomes really important because the notion that we have that photos are truth telling or that photos are good evidence, Talbot is signaling it. But all of these sciences and all of the scientific work is really pushing that sense. And photos at this point, there were experimental photographers and people taking images of ghosts or ghostly images, but there was a real even amongst those kind of different practices to view photography as a scientific practice. And it was seen as a scientific instrument at that moment, but not immediately as art. And There's a great Baudelaire quote. Baudelaire was one of the important French theorists of the 19th century that really argued for photography to not be art. And he writes, let photography enrich the traveler's album, restore to his eyes the precision of his memory, let it adorn the library of the naturalist, magnify macroscopic image insects, and even strengthen the hypothesis of the astronomer. He's covering almost everything we've talked about so far. Let it in short be the secretary and record keeper of who Whomsoever needs absolute material accuracy for professional reasons. And what he's saying in Quiet Digs here is let it not be used for art. Let it instead be this scientific thing and let's just leave it there and let science be in the world of drawing. Eventually this Baudelaire loses out and photos are definitely considered art, but it was an argument and it was not an argument that was not yet solved and was actively being debated in the 1880s. And so I kind of want to surface that some of that is part of why photos mean the way that we mean. And it happens in this sort of very early moments. Okay, section three. Images as instruments of the state. So this section is a little trickier and it really is talking about images as they relate to criminality and control. And So I want to give a very gentle trigger warning. And I'm not going to actually show that many images in this section. So the first image I want to show is Alphonse Bertillon. So Bertillon was actually a clerk for the Paris police in France, and his job was to copy verbal descriptions of criminals onto index cards so that they could kind of be tracked or kept track of. Thought And this is in the 1880s, he's doing this and 1870s. And he thinks that maybe there's a better way of doing this. And so he invents the Bertian system, which is essentially our early system of anthropometric measurings and mug shots or identification shots. And here he's photographing another scientist, a polymath, Francis Galton, that we're going to talk about in a minute. Your license... That shows your face, your eye color, your height, all of this information about you, it is a result of this system that he invented in France in the 1880s, 1890s. And The notion was that if you can keep track of criminals and you can show what they look like, then you can help prevent crime. And there was some evidence that pickpocketing went down and things like that in Paris. But really what Bertiam did was he developed a system and It was a system of sort of building information of people and he created classes and started to teach the system. And here is that system being taught in France in 1911. What I really want to show here is this grid of faces and the grid that is being used here as a form of control. And as a form of bureaucracy and statecraft. And this is sort of one of the earlier moments when the grid becomes part of that. Of course, the grid returns in art in so many different ways. And it will return our contemporary examples in just a minute. Here, photography as knowledge is shifting a little bit. Now it's not just telling us something new about the person. It's now a way of sort of gathering a lot of information. And Alan Skula has a really great quote about this, where he writes, the central artifact of this system, and he's talking specifically about the system of capturing and of recording the body as a state, as a government. Is not the camera, but the filing cabinet. And this comes from Sekula's excellent essay, The Body in the Archive, which is a 60-page history of all of this and what it means for the history of photography, and which I drew on for this section. What Sekula is really saying here and what I really want to emphasize is that All of a sudden, photos aren't individual. Now they're part of a system and they are part of an archive and they are collectively making meaning. And this is super true of how we treat photography now. There are. 
Generate knowledge and change the way that we relate to images. You know, before this, you can imagine images were more precious, less valuable. Multiples. Bless. There's fewer of them. So we didn't need such an intense system to understand them. So Bertian really changes the way that we think about how images are produced and how they can be used to control. And then there's Francis Galton. And so Francis Galton, who you saw an image of two slides ago in Bertillon's mugshot, He was the founder in the 1880s of the eugenics movement. And the eugenics movement is the idea that we should selectively allow humans to reproduce based on their traits. It is today widely disrespected. Disproven and no longer practiced. But And there's a lot to say about it, but what we're going to talk about here is not eugenics or Galton, but how he used photography to sort of sell End. Promote and try to understand information about the human body towards his eugenicist aims. And what that means about how photography can generate knowledge and what it tells us about images. So here's an image, a closeup of what Galton's process was. And he invented this process and then other people would go on to use it as well. So he's taking a bunch of pictures of faces and then printing them over and over on the same plate. In order to create an average. And so here's 20 cases, here's 36 cases. He averages them out to 30 to 56 cases. And what gouten is suggesting here, which is disproven, is that the way that someone looks can tell us about what they are like and can give us information about their traits and qualities. So he is using photography to promote terrible things like stereotypes and biases and trying to sort people into good and bad categories based on their images. And even Galton's method has been disproven now because he would select images if he wanted people that were sick or had a predilection to getting ill, he would pick specifically images of people that looked ill and then average them. So even his methods are now disproven. But, He's using photography to add authority, to add authenticity, and to give it a sense of accuracy and realness. Photography's relationship to the real in order to promote this system that he's creating. And This is so important because Whereas scientific photography was trying to learn something about the world. Bertian and Galton are picking up photographic knowledge and that foundation to now use that knowledge to exercise control. And we can see that today in so many different ways from flock cameras and surveillance images and all of the different ways that photography is now used as a form of statecraft. But I think it's so important to introduce these two and this history that's happening in France in the 1880s because it really shows that relationship that history was designed and was part of the government's use of photography towards its own ends from a really early point. And now I want to introduce a couple of artists that are both working with and against this history. Who are both activating the grid and who are thinking about how this relationship between photography and mug shots and images of systems and types Mate. Be used as a work of art. And the first one is, "Paren Simons: A Living Man Declared Dead" and other chapters. And so this is a project that Terrence Simon did where she used archival research and photography to look at the relationship between bloodlines, inheritance, over 18 different stories and chapters. And she's probing narratives in contemporary politics and thinking about How do we understand identity, lineage, memory, and those relationships to state bureaucracy and control? And so what's literally going on here is she tracked down an entire family who had been declared dead by the state. Of India where they lived because of a bribe and so the reason that bribe was given was to take their land and They were still fighting in the courts to try to get their land back But she's essentially trying to surface this story by photographing the people but unlike a sort of more documentary aesthetic She's very much using a Bertie own aesthetic with these sort of very clean grids and these descriptions dry descriptions of what happened And so she's building on this history in order to investigate Sometimes issues of This. Injustice, but sometimes just interesting things that she is curious about. And then the other one that I want to show, which was actually suggested by Haver, and I'm very thankful because it's a really great example. Is Zanelli-Moholi's project Faces and Phases. And so Zanelli-Moholi is a South African photographer. And here, even though Gay marriage was legalized in 2006 queer women were still actively persecuted. And so in this project, she's taken, I think as of today, over 300 images of queer women in same orientation and the same size image, but not exactly like a mugshot, but sort of alluding to that history. But here, instead of trying to control them, they are invited to sort of enact their own identity and enact their self hood and their presence and this is really great because it's sort of subverting this notion that Bertian is doing where he's trying to use the grid and trying to use the repeated portrait as a form of control. And here, Moholy is inviting these women to take back that control and to Bye. Use the aesthetics of the state in order to subvert it. And I think this is a really good example of two different ways that artists can kind of engage with some of that history that's going on. And there are a lot of other examples too. Okay. So key points here. So, with Bertillon and Gatton, Photography presents itself as yet another new kind of evidence. It's no longer just tied to the trace. But now it relies on text, data, measurement, and archives. And here, photography is being used as a tool to generate knowledge. Here's a bunch of information about these people, but to exercise control. And that is the big difference here is that it's now being used to change the way that we can understand people in order to control them. And this is really overt version of photography is being used by the state. But when we move on to the next section, documentary, then we're going to talk a little bit about how it's being used by the state in some more covert ways. Section three. Section four. Documentary and manipulation. - So this section is going to sort of pick up In the 1880s, pretty much where the last section left off but we're gonna but it's gonna look at doc the history of documentary photography and I guess we'll just dive right in. So what is documentary photography? Well, first of all, it is not something that is inherent to photography. It is... It's a historical term that was invented and it relates to social work. And social work as in the notion that we are going to use photography to benefit people's social lives. And one of the earliest ever documentary photographers was Jacob Reese. And Reese is published his most famous book, How the Other Half Lives in 1890, that looked at slums, unhoused and impoverished people in the Bowery in New York. And his book was a catalyst for citywide reform changing building codes making it so that slumlords can't exist or is are illegal and his photos really brought to light a really important invisibility that was happening in the city. And it often serves as a model for photographers and urban historians to sort of think about how they might enact social change. And here in this picture, we can see nomads of the street children in their sleeping quarters in the 1890s. And so Reese is going around the city and he's essentially taking pictures of Deez. And he's the person that invented the flash photo because so many of the areas he was photographing were too dark. So here's a sort of early example of a documentary photographer. And another really good early example is Lewis Hines. So was actually hired by a lobbying group to photograph and capture child labor, which mostly in Pennsylvania and South Carolina, in order to try to lobby and change laws around child labor. And he was successful. Those laws did change. And so here is Breaker Boys working in Ewan Breaker, Pennsylvania coal company. And This is in Pennsylvania. And I mean, Heinz pictures are now owned by the Library of Congress. And there are 2,500 of these that you can browse through where I took my selection of two. And here's another one that is well-known. And this is a young girl working at a textile mill in South Carolina, Lancaster Cotton Mills. 1908. So like Ries, is trying to take pictures of things out in the world in order to surface and reveal these injustices. And this sort of shapes what photography can be. Okay, it can be a thing that we use for social practice, or it can be a thing that we can use to... Reveal something that's hidden. In a different way than the scientific photography from before. But theorists since then have sort of troubled and problematized this. And I want to read a kind of long quote that I'm going to talk through a little bit by Martha Rosler who is a photographer and a theorist that's really thinking a lot about documentary. And so here is Rosler's quote. She writes, In contrast to the pure sensationalism of much of the journalistic attention to working class immigrant and slum life, and she's talking about here, text and written journalism that was unkind to, working class people or impoverished people. And then she goes on to say the meliorism so meliorism is a word that comes from ameliorate to that means to make better, to improve, to somehow help fix. So the hope for improvement of Reese, Lewis, Hind, and others involved in social work propagandizing argued. So in contrast to the sensationalism of journalism, the hope for a better world It's seen in Reese and Hines' work. Argued through the presentation of images combined with other forms of discourse, she's thinking writing here, for the rectification of wrongs. So in other words, just simply put, Lewis Hine and Reese hoped that the world would rectify the wrongs if they only photographed it. It, this hope. Did not perceive those wrongs as fundamental to the social system that tolerated them. The assumption that they were tolerated rather than bred marks a basic fallacy of social work. So Rosler is really saying something about society here. She's saying, There is this early promise that photography, if we only show it will fix it. But actually she's saying the world bred those problems and photography can illuminate them but there is this sort of assumption that the only reason they exist is because we can't see them but no she's saying actually We exist in a more pessimistic world where those things occur. And I'm bringing this quote up because pretty quickly, Although these two artists... Their photos really did change laws and really did help things. But pretty quickly, the documentary promise and the documentary aesthetic and rhetoric blir beskrivet og utdannet av regjeringen, og blir beskrivet og utdannet av den kjørende klassen. Og vi ser dokumentarer forandre. And I want to kind of talk through that. So this is the 1890s and 1910s. And then we're going to jump into the Great Depression in the 1930s. So here's Dorothea Lange, and I'm showing this picture This is the image that's very famous, but Leng came and photographed this pea picker now known as migrant mother, a whole bunch of times with her 4x5 or 5x7 camera. In California where this is from. And Excuse me. And She selected just one image out of the entire selection and knew that image would be the one. And so there is a sense of manipulation happening here already because even in the act of selecting, She's changing the whole story. She's not showing you exactly what she wants. And we'll see that manipulation becomes very normalized in documentary photography as we proceed through. And so here's what Lange writes about this image. So this is the image that she selects based on the entire one. And Lange writes, Quote, "I did not ask her name or her history. She told me her age, that she was 32. She said they had been living on frozen vegetables from the surrounding fields and birds that the children killed. She had just sold the tires from her car to buy food. That one's not true. People have since found this woman and found out that she drove away from the field later that day. Lang continues, there she sat in that lean-to tent with her children huddled around her and seemed to know that my pictures might help her. And so she helped me. There was a sort of equality about it. The pea crop at Niponmo had frozen and there was no work for anybody. But I did not approach the tents and shelters of other stranded pea pickers. It was not necessary. I knew I had recorded the essence of my assignment. Great quote. Really gives you a sense of the power relations there. And the essence of Lange's assignment was that she was hired by the FSA, by the U.S. Government, to capture iconic, memorable images of agricultural workers that rouse support for Franklin Gallinor Roosevelt's programs. So she is a government employee. This image is not in copyright, never was. It was immediately sent out on the wire and published in newspapers all over the world. And she's been hired to essentially take these pictures of these anonymized people in order to drum up support for the president. And It's so interesting because her quote really reveals the way that she sort of saw this woman and her children as a tool to achieve her aims. And those aims weren't truly documentary. She didn't take down her information when the Images drew up so much outcry and the government sent support to this camp. This woman had already left and didn't receive any of that support. So there is this sort of sense where even if the earliest promises of documentary existed It moves into a world that is based around rhetoric and beauty. And you can really see that. She picked the image that is the most beautiful, that is the most distant, where she's looking off in the distance, where we see almost none of the environment, where we can project so much more onto this woman's face than some of these other images, which are beautiful. Actually offering a lot more information about what's going on. They see more of the tent. You see more of the landscape. You see a lot more going on. And I want to bring up another example of this, which is Walker Evans. And this is just a wonderful, subtle example. And these are two pictures of Allie Mae Burroughs. Walker Evans embedded with the family, the Burroughs family, and this is the mother of the family for three weeks in Hale County, Alabama. He was on assignment from Fortune magazine to take pictures of how a drought was affecting people in the South in this year, 1936. And I love these two images because they're so subtle. Sorry about my cursor there. And you can see this one where she's got kind of a scowl. And then this one where she has almost a smile and her brow is less furrowed and her face is softer. And the reason I like this is because Walker Evans used these pictures selectively. The one on the left he included in his MoMA show of 1939, I think. And the one on the right is the image that he published in the book, Let Us Now Praise Famous Men. And the images, they do slightly different work and they really demonstrate how subtle choices can change how we understand a face, a story and a person. And here, Evans is sort of cropped so close on her. All we have is her face and the wooden clapboards. We have almost nothing else to really see. So let's see a couple more images of the Burroughs household. That Evans has used. And then we're actually going to play a really short video of Ali May talking about the experience of being photographed by Walker Evans in the 1930s. So here's two still lifes that he included of the kitchen, the farmhouse kitchen, corner of kitchen and farmer's kitchen. And I guess I'm going to let Ali May talk about it first, and then we're going to go in and kind of describe and talk through what we're seeing in these pictures real quick. Okay, so here Haver is going to... Queue up the video now. 
Okay. I'm back on now. So what a wonderful quote and what a wonderful statement from her where she really notices that they all left, Evans stayed behind and then moved stuff around. But why? And the reason that Evans gives, and we're going to sort of see it in some of these images, is because he wanted to beautify the photos that he was taking of their house. Like he wanted to both... Capture their poverty, their living situation and demonstrate and reveal it to the world. But he was like driven by ego. He wanted his pictures to be really beautiful. And we can really see that in these two frames, right? Like, look at how he's placed The broom. On its handle upside down so that it produces this really lovely diagonal across the frame. I mean, that's great looking, but I'm pretty confident that the Burroughses didn't store their broom like that. And then over here, you can see the kind of wonderful tempo of bowls. Owl. Lamb. And pot. Kind of moving all through and diagonally back into the frame. And if you really look at those things, they're all kind of awkwardly placed. The reason I'm bringing this up and the reason I'm showing it is because Here, we've moved from Hine to Evans in this sort of moment where he's photographing for a rich magazine, Fortune magazine. He's making the pictures beautiful and really like who is he working for and what is going on? And there's a sort of real sense of documentary is... It. There isn't a sense at the time, but we can sort of see today the documentary is full of manipulation and selection, and it really troubles our sense of rhetoric. So I have another long quote to read and permit me. It's by another well-known photography theorist named Abigail Solomon Goodell. And the reason that I'm reading this long quote is because I think she summarizes a lot of what I'm doing my best to get through really well and summarizes some of our assumptions about photography really well. And then we're going to kind of move from here to some of the contemporary artists. And so she writes, and I'm paraphrasing here, "Although photographs purport to offer a truthful rendition of reality, Although they purport to offer this, quote, rarely is a photograph's net subject neutral or unmarked to begin with. So there's already something going on. Even if it's truthful. In part, this derives from the fact that photography, like all camera-made images such as film and video, effaces the marks of its making. And maker at the click of a shutter. So again, this goes back all the way to Talbot where the maker doesn't control everything that's happening in frame. A photograph, she writes, appears to be self-generated as though it had created itself. We know the photographs had to have been, we know the photographer had to have been on the scene. Indeed, this serves as a further guarantee of the image's truth. But the photographer is manifestly absent from the field of the image. Instead, we are there. We are seeing what the photographer saw at the moment of exposure. This structural congruence of point of view. The eye of the photographer The eye of the camera. And the spectator's eye confers on the photograph a quality of pure but delusory presentness. This is the important point, so I'm going to read it again. The structural congruence of point of view. The... Flattening of all that's going on in the camera and the situation and the photographer and the sitter into the completely flat photograph. That I have a the eye of the photographer, the eye of the camera and the spectator's eye all at once confers on the photograph quality of pure but delusory presentness. So in other words, we can't always trust what we see. And a photograph as Victor Bergen, remember Victor Bergen from earlier a great theorist. The photograph, as Victor Bergen once remarked, is an offer that cannot be refused. ואני אוהב את הסדה הזו ואת סרטון של פרקה שלה כי זה באמת נתן לנתן Photography developed in itself a rhetoric that was really convincing. But was subversive. And not always truthfulness true in its convincingness. And we can sort of see this in Lange's quote that is a little bit of a fabrication and Evans' restructuring of the house in order to get the pictures he needs. So now I want to show a couple Artists that are actually playing with this in the contemporary moment. This one is a bit old, but here's Martha Rosler. So before she wrote that essay from that quote, she was trying to engage photographically with inadequate descriptive systems. The inadequate descriptive systems she's talking about here are photography and text. And so here The Bowery and two inadequate descriptive systems shows traces of human presence and particularly drunkenness in the form of liquor bottles and other litter as a counter documentary practice instead of showing drunk people or anything. She's just showing the refuse. And then she's paired this with images or with text that are synonyms for drunkenness, hard drinker, stewed, boiled, but then some of them are harder to read. Dead soldiers, dead Marines. And What she's doing is she's really trying to point out the failure of photography or text to really address these issues in the social moment. It is a form of protest against the government and against society and culture. And it's sort of trying to say that these people forms of communication are not adequate and our use of them is fallacious. It does not actually produce the knowledge that we think it should. And then the other image i want to bring up here is by philip lorca de courcia and This is from his Hustler series and what Lorca de Corsha has done for his hustler series is he has gone to LA. This is Beverly Hills, I think. And he hires male prostitutes for approximately the fee that they would charge their johns. And instead of asking for sexual services, he hires them to pose for his camera. And so this man here is posed. You can see he's posed on the John Lennon star. But instead of taking... A snapshot of them, he's taking a large format view camera frame with lighting. And you can see that there's a little bit of light kind of hitting him on the side here as key lighting. So it This isn't an image that is like a Reese image where he's gone to the city and taken a snapshot and captured something that's really happening. This entire scene, including the lighting, has been orchestrated by the artist. And the sitter is someone who is both truly and like living in the positionality that, They're depicted, but they're hired here as a model and contributing to the photographic process. What I love about this is that it really turns documentary photography on its head. All of a sudden, we are dealing with a whole bunch of things that are set up and chosen, and yet, are they still depicting something that's real? Should they change the way that we think about poverty or sex work in LA in the 1990s. It sort of shifts the way that we can talk about these things. Through whole series of intentional decisions. And the other thing I love about this photo And we're going to talk more about this type of photography, which is tableau photography, a little bit in two weeks. And we'll see if Lorca de Corsia makes it into the slideshow. I haven't made it yet. The other thing I love about this photo is that it looks, he looks so angelic and it really like gives a sense of the Pieta, which is Mary holding the dead Jesus. And the drapes really look a lot like a Michelangelo, which I haven't included in this slideshow, but you can Google Michelangelo Pieta if you want to see the similarity. And so these two artists are both sort of subverting and questioning the documentary promise in really different ways. One through a whole bunch of intentionality and one through a really direct critique. In both instances, they are really drawing on that history and thinking through it in their work. So key points before we move on to the final section. The term documentary was invented and championed It's historical, not ontological. So what I mean by this is even the very notion of documentary photography was invented in the 1920s, I think by Walker Evans, although I'm not 100% sure about the origins of that. And it's not true to the nature of photography. It was designed and it is a historical term that people have been working to sort of problematize and subvert ever since. It involved... Despite purporting not to, manipulation, editing, and selection that advanced an invisible argument or position. And last, while it proposed to ameliorate societal ills, it came to be funded by the government and the wealthy. And so what I'm trying to do here is say that like this documentary is, and we still see documentary today and there's a lot of great documentary photographers and photographers going and surfacing amazing things that are really important. But it has a complicated history and the way that it, seems real and generates knowledge and the aesthetics of that kind of photos of the photography that does social work. Is wrapped up in a government project and in a type of rhetoric that was not Only. Me, Good in a sense. So then we're going to jump forwards a whole bunch of time, and we're going to end with a series of questions about AI. And generative images. ‫האחרון, המקום 5, ‫הם סרטונים ביום הרפס. So I'm starting here with images beyond reference with an image that isn't generated by AI, but is by one font kuberta i'm sorry if i'm saying that wrong and what he did was he is taking household and biological objects. And. Putting them together to create invented, not real scientific images. So these images look a lot like botanical illustration. And photography was of course used for botanical illustration as well. But the names that he's choosing for them are completely invented. And the objects themselves are not real. But he is playing with our notion of what is science, what is scientific imagery. And this is part of his project Herbarium. And there is no reference for these images. But of course, there is a reference, like they're pretending to be a real specimen. That specimen doesn't exist. But the object that he's photographing really did. So the reason I'm bringing him up first is because photographers have been engaging with notions of subverting the promise of reality that photography offers for a long time, for decades. But today, that engagement is taking on a new sort of urgency with generative AI. And I did some reading. This is not an area that I'm an expert in. When I studied the history of photography in undergrad and grad school, none of this was happening. So I had to kind of learn and figure out some of the stuff on my own for this lecture. And It's still deeply being wrought in scholarship and in the world. So here's aperture by one of the most important and famous magazines of photography. Publishing an entire issue about a year and a half ago about photography and AI. And the cover image here is actually not an AI image. It is an image by Trevor Paglen, who was doing a project on facial recognition. And so I'm not the only one kind of wondering how do we write about photography and AI? What does it mean that images can now be generated? But There has been a it is a really big shift because some of those earliest promises the Talbot offered well, the photo is indexical. Photo relates to the world. The photo contains things that we didn't intend. They all start to break down when you generate an image. All of a sudden, does it relate to the world directly? If it is entirely generated by a machine, does it contain anything we intend or is it fully unintentional? And How is the text image relation when you put in a prompt and you get an image out? And so all of a sudden, really, what do we think of photography has shifted in such a drastic way? And I want to introduce a couple of artists that are doing work in this sphere that I think are interesting. And there's much more than two that I'm highlighting here. But I think they give a good example. And then I want to kind of end with a quote, and then we're going to open up for questions in just a few minutes. So the first artist is an image that you may recognize. This is Boris Eldrugsen. And he produced this image with Dali 2 in 2022, and he submitted it to a photo award, managed by Sony and he won his category and then it became The contest became aware that the photo was generated and not real. And it caused a whole controversy and it was a whole thing. But what's really interesting is He says that he... Revealed that it was AI from the very beginning, but then there was some questions about it. But then when you look at it carefully, you can sort of see in the hands and in a few of the different things that it really does look very generated. But in 2022, we didn't have the same eye towards generated images and people might not have even known that it could have been generated and would have just assumed, it looks photographic. It's part of the experimental and creative category. Of course it looks like this and not that it was a result of just a simple prompt. And so he's doing both kind of photographic work where it's an interesting and compelling image, but conceptual and theoretical work asking, what does it mean that we can sort of submit photographs and Of course, he didn't expect to win the contest, but as soon as he did, the photo takes on new and more urgent meaning. And then the other artist I want to highlight here is Minnie Ataru. And she is a Black artist that is thinking about the friction between how developers and data sets understand Blackness and how Black people present themselves. And she's in this project, Cornrow Studies. She is creating a whole series of generative images, I think with not Dali, but The other one. And she's creating a whole series of images and she's sort of watching how even though they kind of look good and sort of look Afrofuturist, but then The system is not that good at really rendering blackness properly and you'll see issues with the skin or the cornrows are sort of floating rather than looking appropriate and she sort of is trying to surface both through an aesthetic, but through the data set the bias of the algorithm. So I have a detail shot to sort of show where you can sort of see this a little bit more carefully, where you see that her skin doesn't look quite right. And The rows look more like ribbons. And you can sort of see that even though the AI is trying, it's not doing really quite a proper job. And of course, this has a really important history in the history of photography, which was that Kodak films were initially designed only to photograph white bodies and they didn't photograph black skin very well and there was a reckoning eventually with that. Initially, the chemistry of photography was trained on whiteness as well. And so her project relates to the history of analog photography, but is now engaging in the world of AI. And I want to end here. With just a quote, and then I'll talk through that quote for a little bit. And this is from Fred Richen in a book in 1990. And he is This book was sort of very prescient and I got this quote from that Aperture magazine that I showed up above. I did not read the whole book, but the quote is just so great. It really gives us a lot to think about. And he writes should photography's relationship to physical existence become suddenly tenuous Its vocabulary would be transformed and its system of representation would have to be reconsidered. We'll stop. - And really what he's saying is if we can make images without reference, The whole promise of photography changes and we will have to reconsider the whole system. And I think that we're really in that moment right now where there's all of this photo history that really gives us a lot of information about how we understand images and how they've come to have an epistemology in society that really shows us what it means to know. But now that is already changing in really big ways and. There isn't great writing about it. I tried to read some. And it's because we're living in that history. And historians are not trained to write the future or write the present. They're trained to think about the past. And so we're really in a kind of exciting moment where photography is changing in a really big way right now. And I think, you know, in five or 10 years, we'll sort of have a really different vocabulary for it. But with that, I will end and open it up to questions and check in with Haver and see what questions have come through so far.
Haiver | 01:13:34
Yeah, please keep dropping questions in the chat. We have a few so far. I just want to respond. I mean, I love Wilson Bentley's snowflakes. They're So wondrous. As well as the moon photos of those 1850s, 1870s that you were showing. They re-enchant the world for me in a really particular way. And I think we can think of photography and even scientific photography as like often stripping out some of that magic. It can be seen as cold and clinical or as Baudelaire wanted to call it, right? Let it be the secretary. Yeah. Professional reasons only. Yeah. Yeah. It's something to be like, people in that time were getting to see these incredible images. It does feel wondrous. And to feel, you know, what it must have been like to suddenly, you know, to have your imaginary changed and reshaped.
Elliot Krasnopoler | 01:14:31
Totally. Yeah, I mean... I like to think about that too because Some of the earliest promises of photography were ones that made the world feel more present, more beautiful, more big, right? Think about, you know, early landscape photography and stuff like they initially the system was expansive and it's now it feels repressive there's so many images we don't even know if they're real everyone's tracking us and taking our picture we're on social media too much but It's really interesting how it's sort of grown from these early promises and early optimism to this thing where, you know, like my friends who have kids, they blur their faces on the internet and it's a lot more insidious now. And I really kind of wanted to include some of that documentary theory and those documentary quotes because I think that we can kind of historicize and track back some of that insidiousness and where that developed. But it gives... A lot for artists to pick up on and work on because you can place yourself, you can decide, Where, what history of photography do I want to pick up on? What, where do I want to place my work? Do I want to subvert this epistemology or this moment? Or do I want to really come back to this like older moment? And I think there's really, There's novel ways to engage in all of these different time periods and moments of photography. And there's artists that are kind of working in a lot of different modes.
Haiver | 01:16:00
Yeah, that's very much our hope. And I think the design of these art history lectures in general is to give artists just pathways and threads they might go down or pull on to mix my metaphors quite quickly. Yeah. Yeah, the... The insidious nature of the archive today and the data set and to realize like AI has really It's been a gift for big business. They've had all this data for a long time, but not the labor perhaps to be able to parse it or to make good use out of it. And suddenly they're enabled to really leverage whatever data they have been collecting for a long time in new ways for those commercial ends.
Elliot Krasnopoler | 01:16:44
Yeah. And it's so interesting. I use for my job at Smart History, Everyone, my full-time job is at a wonderful website called smarthistory.org, and they are the public center for art history. One of the things I do for that job is I edit photos of museums, which are really messy places, and I'm constantly generative filling things away. And it's not lost on me what a great job this thing does and how well it sort of picks up on patterns and it just puts it back in. But computers have Come to. Be a way of understanding images that's so different than the way that we understand images. Like even the notion that you can reverse image search is still weird to me. It does such a good job. How does it know? And I know that there are people with data science that know how it knows. But it's just such a shift. To the sacredness of images, right? Where they used to sort of stand alone and be this unique thing that we couldn't quite understand or wrap our heads around. And, you know, a picture is worth a thousand words, but like, what is a picture worth in a data set? 我 感 受 到 有 所 改 變 I think one of the reasons I titled the talk and I kind of, framed it this way is because I'm having some anxiety about the epistemology of photography right now. And this was a really wonderful opportunity for me to sort of work through and think through some of that anxiety by looking at a history. So I appreciate all of your patience while I sort of think through that on my own.
Haiver | 01:18:29
Yeah, it's interesting to think about, we've focused this entire lecture on photo history, but how these changes in ways of seeing have taken place in art history writ large for centuries and even millennia. The change from an idealized Greek sculpture to a more realist rendering of the face in a Roman sculpture. Or the sudden introduction of perspective with the Renaissance and the way that it was moving off of the flat. We are constantly throughout human history changing our relationship to images and how they reveal the world.
Elliot Krasnopoler | 01:19:12
Yeah, what do you think? Can I ask you a question? Yeah. So... Do you think that This is an impossible question, but What role do you think artists play in that change? Do you think artists are riding it like a wave and they're just surfing down that change? Or do you think artists are the wave and they are like moving that change through the world? I think it's really interesting to talk about as an art historian, my perspective is really very diagnostic, right? I'm trying to not I'm trying to understand. You know what do i see and why is it happening but i kind of wonder from your perspective running this residency and working with a lot of artists and being an artist how you sort of think about some of those things.
Haiver | 01:20:22
The crowd, if you will. And artists love to be rebels, so in a lot of cases, not. But it is hard to see anew, to like, if culture is the water and we're fish swimming in that, it's hard to see the water that we're in. But I think the best artists are ones who are able to out of body experience themselves a little bit and see the culture for what it is and interrogate it. So the way many of the last artists we were looking at is trying to say, okay, the data set here of AI image generation is the averaging of all of human culture Except it's not, right? And that's kind of what her work is drawing out. It is the averaging of a subset of data that was created by, you know, X group of people within X span of time. Does it include these books from other spans of time? And AI, this artist, Michael Perez, who goes by the handle Fantastic Planet, said to me recently, right, data, like AI cannot show you what it hasn't learned.- So from that, you can be the artist who I think leans into interrogating the archive. That's one way of the five sections that you draw. That's kind of what the last couple of hours we're doing. You can be the artist who pushes back on, you know, social issues or state issues and respond to that. I think what your documentary section really drew out for me is The difference between telling a factual truth versus an emotional truth. And to express the emotional truth, can sometimes make it more poignant. But I think overall here in the sea of images, at a time when there are more images than there have ever been, and every image therefore is perhaps valued less, not just in the archive or the data set, but just scrolling Instagram, opening my newspaper, there's just too many images. Like we will pick up on the moments of difference And so figuring out how to differentiate yourself, I think, is really important here.
Elliot Krasnopoler | 01:22:33
Yeah, I think that's really great. It's funny, as you were talking about the data sets and things, I thought, wow, that's just exactly what the FSA was doing. They were just building their own data set in order to build their own messages. And it's just still happening today. And there's, yeah, I mean, there's so many great writers like Sekula and, Rosler are two of them that are really wondering about photography and power. There's like so many books about this. But it's interesting to me. Ow. Really hard certain mediums are so engaged with this sense of right like if you are a weaver or something or a painter even your relationship to that medium doesn't connect you in these worlds unless you kind of intend it. But photography, it brings a lot of baggage. And you have all these different layers that even if you didn't intend, it's like the medium is kind of in a meta way. Bringing stuff that you didn't necessarily want to bring to it. And I think that's kind of poetic But it's kind of problematic because it means that there's this undue labor on the photography, the photographic artists, where they have to kind of figure out all of this stuff and think through things in a way They don't have to, but you know, they might think through things in a way that about folks from a different medium might not. But it's why I love writing about photography. And in my dissertation, all three projects used photography, even they though they weren't all three photographers. Because From an interpretive standpoint, photos offer so many different levels of entrance and ways to engage and to dive into them. And even though they purport to be flat, they are these like layered stratigraphic histories that you can then really sort of think through and offer so many different wonderful modes of interpretation and modes of meaning. Which is why I think it's a really exciting medium.
Haiver | 01:24:45
- Agreed, yeah. I think the raptures caused by photography are really helpful for trying to make sense of this moment, which is, I was really glad to dive into it with you. I want to respond to a couple things in the comments here from students. One wanted to shout out Tyrone Turner's thermo photography of airplanes as being another unseen world aspect of photography. They're really beautiful. This reminded me personally of some of the... Hot air balloon. Like the photographs that I saw. I once heard this story about like a, itinerant photographer traveling the West in the late 1800s and photographing cities from hot air balloons. I have never like I don't know where this story came from and like I kind of Yeah, I need to go down that rabbit hole. Someone else asked about in this moment of AI, humans as animals, right? Our brains are designed to pick out the smallest of anomalies and to detect threats. We've lost Elliot. While he's joining back in, I'll keep responding to this. Many most of, right, we detect these AI threats and do you see a time when these images will be seen by humans as real and able to trick the human brain? I mean, I think that's already happening. I A few weeks ago, I was messaging my wife an image that I saw, and she texted me back. She's like, "That's already been debunked." And I felt so old in that moment. Like, I felt 30, 40 years older than I am suddenly, like, trying to help my own parents navigate these kinds of things of what's true and not. Like, " that's a robocall. You don't need to pick that up or respond to that. Please don't give them your important information and data." So I think similarly here, The... AI is already getting to that point, and even the young can be tricked. And the question went on, does that leave humans unable to detect threats? This leaves the development of AI ultimately with the goal to trick the human brain, does it not? And this goal leaves many societal implications. It's very anxiety inducing, I agree. Yeah, I mean, I think It all comes down to the end with which Whoever has access to the tools is using it. Many of the goals are simply to sell to us. Or to advertise to us. And so, yes, I feel like that will be a big component here of tricking us throughout time. So I think that just increases and thankfully there are new things being come out with all the time for helping detect some of these flaws. I heard recently that Claude in its writing, the AI tool released by Anthropic, it will allow us to As it writes, it will have a predilection towards certain phrasings and words that if it doesn't get paraphrased later by the human writer, you'll actually be able to better detect that it is AI writing. And it will be so subtle in that routing of what words it chooses that you likely won't be able to detect it yourself when you're reading it to know what to weed out. So that's helpful. Companies are finding ways to put in those kinds of fingerprints, which I think will only become all the more useful. A lot of photography companies have started putting together, they're working on a standard to be able to use you know, to have baked into the cameras some kind of verification system that this photograph that you're looking at was taken by this actual camera on an actual date and place. Maybe that these GPS coordinates so that we're able to verify some chain of custody for an image. So I'm excited for that. I want to close out with Elliot, who's back now. We got one great question from ours. Could you maybe explain how index has changed. With the emergence of AI? Like where does index live now? And maybe in the process, Elliot, as you're answering this, redefine, like define once again what index means in this context.
Elliot Krasnopoler | 01:29:12
Okay. Sorry about that. I don't know where I went, but I'm glad to be back. You know, I think that. I mean, obviously index is still a really real sign that is still very present. And when you take a photo with your camera or with a film camera or step on a beach, you are making an indexical trace and you're capturing it I think that the index, it used to have, it formerly had a trustworthiness. If this looks like an indexical image, it is an indexical image. And this is where Barth's reality effect comes into play right part Roland Barthes writes about this and there is this sort of You know if it looks like an elephant it is an elephant but now I That's starting to break down, which means that we have to use it critical side of our brains to sort of wonder, is this indexical? Is this real? And then one of the things that surfaced a whole lot Those images that were really indexical, the crowd at a political rally no, that crowd isn't real, that was AI generated. Now we have to use it we can use the index subversively. That's not indexical. That is indexical. And this thing that didn't used to be up for debate is now all of a sudden, a thing in our society that we have to talk about. And as a photo historian, well, that's kind of exciting, 'cause man, we've kind of wished that people would be talking about the index for decades. But as a member of society and culture, it's not ideal from a sort of like end of the world kind of way. And so Yeah, you know, I think some people have a lot of language to talk about that and some people don't. And we're really seeing that play out in the world. In both interesting, troubling, and sort of like, scary ways.
Haiver | 01:31:13
- Yeah, I'm glad we got the previous question from a student which led me to talking about camera verification systems and standards for being able to say a photograph is a photograph. Because once we have that, we're able to point at everything that doesn't have that verification, that metadata or embedding an invisible watermark, if you will, and say, well, then that is not a photograph. How do you think, as you've been dipping your toes into this kind of AI photograph realm, like Boris's work as well, like, Are you still calling these images photographs? What do you have?
Elliot Krasnopoler | 01:31:57
I think that that's pretty personal. And there isn't like a established term. Personally, I'm calling them generative images.
Haiver | 01:32:08
-
Elliot Krasnopoler | 01:32:09
And I like that. Like I haven't really done a lot of reflection, but that just what feels more comfortable. Cause like, as an art historian i'm writing down medium like medium when i go to a museum Usually the first thing I look at is medium, not title, not year. I want to know like, what am I looking at?- Gosh, I wouldn't like it if I went to a museum and I saw a generated image and underneath it said photograph, because that to me signals something really specific. And I trust... It's a word that means a lot and I really trust in that meaning. So I would probably want to use generated image or AI image, but I would not use photograph to describe generated images.
Haiver | 01:32:53
Yeah, which is funny because some of those captions, as we described, medium have to do with materiality, which sometimes intersects with process and sometimes doesn't. Like just saying it's oils doesn't mean it was painted with a brush. Saying that is photography doesn't mean it is truthful or that it wasn't staged, which is something we'll get into in a couple of weeks.
Elliot Krasnopoler | 01:33:15
Or photos that are taken as photograms like Man Ray that are not even using a camera, but they are photographs in a museum. And so it's never simple.
Haiver | 01:33:27
No.
Elliot Krasnopoler | 01:33:30
But at least Yeah, but we're going to try to sort of sketch out some boundaries as we sort of trudge through.
Haiver | 01:33:36
We will. I've heard some people toss around the term post-photography, which I'm terrified to touch. I don't know.
Elliot Krasnopoler | 01:33:44
I haven't heard that term yet.
Haiver | 01:33:46
I keep a very long yardstick between me and that for now, but we'll see what happens.
Elliot Krasnopoler | 01:33:51
Well, thank you so much for this wonderful discussion and the opportunity to speak with you all about this. I really appreciate it. And I'm just really grateful.
Haiver | 01:34:00
It's great to have you here, Elliot, and we'll see you again in a couple weeks.
Elliot Krasnopoler | 01:34:04
Okay, sounds great.
Haiver | 01:34:07
All right, art friends, that's our time. As I said while I was talking with Elliot, our goal with these art history lectures is to equip you as artists with paths to explore on your own, to give you ideas, fodder for bringing into your own art practice. If you have been working in one medium that is not the one we looked at today, that's okay. What are the things that refracted off of this discussion and off of the images we looked at today that could intersect with your own practice or raise questions about truthfulness, veracity, the state, science, and generative images that could intersect with the type of work that you are making. The goal is to give you ideas and more importantly questions. Questions that you take back into your own practice and have to solve for yourself because that is the only way that it will get into your work is for you to work at the question and the answers inherent there. So thank you for being here and your attention as always, and look forward to hearing what you make in your studio soon. Cheers.
